America is an exceptional country when it comes to guns. It’s one of the few countries in which the right to bear arms is constitutionally protected. But America’s relationship with guns is unique in another crucial way: Among developed nations, the US is far and away the most violent — in large part due to the easy access many Americans have to firearms. These charts and maps show what that violence looks like compared with the rest of the world, why it happens, and why it’s such a tough problem to fix.

1) America has six times as many firearm homicides as Canada, and nearly 16 times as many as Germany

This chart, compiled using United Nations data collected by Simon Rogers for the Guardian, shows that America far and away leads other developed countries when it comes to gun-related homicides. Why? Extensive reviews of the research by the Harvard School of Public Health’s Injury Control Research Center suggest the answer is pretty simple: The US is an outlier on gun violence because it has way more guns than other developed nations.

2) America has 4.4 percent of the world’s population, but almost half of the civilian-owned guns around the world

3) There have been more than 1,500 mass shootings since Sandy Hook

In December 2012, a gunman walked into Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut, and killed 20 children, six adults, and himself. Since then, there have been at least 1,606 mass shootings, with at least 1,829 people killed and 6,447 wounded as of February 2018.

The counts come via the Gun Violence Archive, which has hosted a database that tracks mass shootings since 2013. But since some shootings go unreported, the database is likely missing some, as well as the details of some of the events.

The tracker uses a fairly broad definition of “mass shooting”: It includes not just shootings in which four or more people were murdered, but shootings in which four or more people were shot at all (excluding the shooter).

Even under this broad definition, it’s worth noting that mass shootings make up a tiny portion of America’s firearm deaths, which totaled more than 33,000 in 2014.

4) On average, there is more than one mass shooting for each day in America

Whenever a mass shooting occurs, supporters of gun rights often argue that it’s inappropriate to bring up political debates about gun control in the aftermath of a tragedy. For example, former Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, a strong supporter of gun rights, criticized former President Barack Obama for “trying to score cheap political points” when Obama mentioned gun control after a mass shooting in Charleston, South Carolina.

But if this argument is followed to its logical end, then it will never be the right time to discuss mass shootings, as Christopher Ingraham pointed out at the Washington Post. Under the broader definition of mass shootings, America has nearly one mass shooting a day. So if lawmakers are forced to wait for a time when there isn’t a mass shooting to talk gun control, they could find themselves waiting for a very long time.

5) States with more guns have more gun deaths

Using data from a study in Pediatrics and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Mother Jones put together the chart above that shows states with more guns tend to have far more gun deaths. And it’s not just one study. “Within the United States, a wide array of empirical evidence indicates that more guns in a community leads to more homicide,” David Hemenway, the Harvard Injury Control Research Center’s director, wrote in Private Guns, Public Health.

Read more in Mother Jones’s “10 Pro-Gun Myths, Shot Down.”

6) It’s not just the US: Developed countries with more guns also have more gun deaths

7) America is an outlier when it comes to gun deaths, but not overall crime

It would be one thing if the US happened to have more crime than other nations, but the existing data shows that not to be the case. America is only an outlier when it comes to homicides and, specifically, gun violence, according to data from Jeffrey Swanson at Duke University.

As Zack Beauchamp explained for Vox, a breakthrough analysis in 1999 by UC Berkeley’s Franklin Zimring and Gordon Hawkins found that the US does not, contrary to the old conventional wisdom, have more crime in general than other Western industrial nations. Instead, the US appears to have more lethal violence — and that’s driven in large part by the prevalence of guns.

“A series of specific comparisons of the death rates from property crime and assault in New York City and London show how enormous differences in death risk can be explained even while general patterns are similar,” Zimring and Hawkins wrote. “A preference for crimes of personal force and the willingness and ability to use guns in robbery make similar levels of property crime 54 times as deadly in New York City as in London.”

This is in many ways intuitive: People of every country get into arguments and fights with friends, family, and peers. But in the US, it’s much more likely that someone will get angry at an argument, be able to pull out a gun, and kill someone.

8) States with tighter gun control laws have fewer gun-related deaths

When economist Richard Florida took a look at gun deaths and other social indicators, he found that higher populations, more stress, more immigrants, and more mental illness didn’t correlate with more gun deaths. But he did find one telling correlation: States with tighter gun control laws have fewer gun-related deaths. (Read more at Florida’s “The Geography of Gun Deaths.”)

This is backed by other research: A 2016 review of 130 studies in 10 countries, published in Epidemiologic Reviews, found that new legal restrictions on owning and purchasing guns tended to be followed by a drop in gun violence — a strong indicator that restricting access to guns can save lives.

9) Still, gun homicides (like all homicides) have declined over the past couple decades

The good news is that all firearm homicides, like all homicides and crime, have declined over the past two decades. (Although that may have changed in 2015 and 2016, with a recent rise in murders nationwide.)

There’s still a lot of debate among criminal justice experts about why this crime drop is occurring — some of the most credible ideas include mass incarceration, more and better policing, and reduced lead exposure from gasoline. But one theory that researchers have widely debunked is the idea that more guns have deterred crime — in fact, the opposite may be true, based on research compiled by the Harvard School of Public Health’s Injury Control Center.

10) Most gun deaths are suicides

Although America’s political debate about guns tends to focus on grisly mass shootings and murders, a majority of gun-related deaths in the US are suicides. As Dylan Matthews explained for Vox, this is actually one of the most compelling reasons for reducing access to guns — there is a lot of research that shows greater access to guns dramatically increases the risk of suicide.

11) The states with the most guns report the most suicides

12) Guns allow people to kill themselves much more easily

Perhaps the reason access to guns so strongly contributes to suicides is that guns are much deadlier than alternatives like cutting and poison.

Jill Harkavy-Friedman, vice president of research for the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention, previously explained that this is why reducing access to guns can be so important to preventing suicides: Just stalling an attempt or making it less likely to result in death makes a huge difference.

“Time is really key to preventing suicide in a suicidal person,” Harkavy-Friedman said. “First, the crisis won’t last, so it will seem less dire and less hopeless with time. Second, it opens the opportunity for someone to help or for the suicidal person to reach out to someone to help. That’s why limiting access to lethal means is so powerful.”

She added, “[I]f we keep the method of suicide away from a person when they consider it, in that moment they will not switch to another method. It doesn’t mean they never will. But in that moment, their thinking is very inflexible and rigid. So it’s not like they say, ‘Oh, this isn’t going to work. I’m going to try something else.’ They generally can’t adjust their thinking, and they don’t switch methods.”

13) Programs that limit access to guns have decreased suicides

When countries reduced access to guns, they saw a drop in the number of firearm suicides. The data above, taken from a study by Australian researchers, shows that suicides dropped dramatically after the Australian government set up a gun buyback program that reduced the number of firearms in the country by about one-fifth.

The Australian study found that buying back 3,500 guns per 100,000 people correlated with up to a 50 percent drop in firearm homicides, and a 74 percent drop in gun suicides. As Dylan Matthews noted for Vox, the drop in homicides wasn’t statistically significant. But the drop in suicides most definitely was — and the results are striking.

Australia is far from alone in these types of results. A study from Israeli researchers found that suicides among Israeli soldiers dropped by 40 percent — particularly on weekends — when the military stopped letting soldiers take their guns home over the weekend.

This data and research have a clear message: States and countries can significantly reduce the number of suicides by restricting access to guns.

14) In states with more guns, more police officers are also killed on duty

Given that states with more guns tend to have more homicides, it isn’t too surprising that, as a study in the American Journal of Public Health found, states with more guns also have more cops die in the line of duty.

Researchers looked at federal data for firearm ownership and homicides of police officers across the US over 15 years. They found that states with more gun ownership had more cops killed in homicides: Every 10 percent increase in firearm ownership correlated with 10 additional officers killed in homicides over the 15-year study period.

The findings could help explain why US police officers appear to kill more people than cops in other developed countries. For US police officers, the higher rates of guns and gun violence — even against them — in America mean they not only will encounter more guns and violence, but they can expect to encounter more guns and deadly violence, making them more likely to anticipate and perceive a threat and use deadly force as a result.

15) Support for gun ownership has sharply increased since the early ’90s

Over the past 20 years, Americans have clearly shifted from supporting gun control measures to greater support of “protecting the right of Americans to own guns,” according to Pew Research Center surveys. This shift has happened even as major mass shootings, such as the attacks on Columbine High School and Sandy Hook Elementary School, have received more press attention.

16) High-profile shootings don’t appear to lead to more support for gun control

Although mass shootings are often viewed as some of the worst acts of gun violence, they seem to have little effect on public opinion about gun rights, based on surveys from the Pew Research Center. That helps explain why Americans’ support for the right to own guns appears to be rising over the past 20 years even as more of these mass shootings make it to the news.

17) But specific gun control policies are fairly popular

Although Americans say they want to protect the right to bear arms, they’re very much supportive of many gun policy proposals — including some fairly contentious ideas, such as more background checks on private and gun show sales and banning semi-automatic and assault-style weapons, according to Pew Research Center surveys.

This type of contradiction isn’t exclusive to gun policy issues. For example, although most Americans in the past said they don’t like Obamacare, most of them also said they like the specific policies in the health-care law. Americans just don’t like some policy ideas until you get specific.

For people who believe the empirical evidence that more guns mean more violence, this contradiction is the source of a lot of frustration. Americans by and large support policies that reduce access to guns. But once these policies are proposed, they’re broadly spun by politicians and pundits into attempts to “take away your guns.” So nothing gets done, and preventable deaths keep occurring.☰

Wonkblog | Analysis

Trump promised to end the "American carnage." Gun deaths are up 12 percent

Acting Brooklyn District Attorney Eric Gonzalez holds a Thompson submachine gun, one of 217 firearms seized during a joint gun trafficking investigation, Wednesday, March 8, 2017. (Photo by Charles Eckert)

Gun deaths are up over 12 percent year-over-year. Firearm injuries are up nearly 8 percent. The number of children under the age of 12 shot by a gun has increased by 16 percent, while instances of defensive gun use are up nearly 30 percent.

Citing "the crime and gangs and drugs that have stolen too many lives and robbed our country of so much unrealized potential," President Donald Trump promised in his inaugural address that "this American carnage stops right here and stops right now." But the numbers above from the Gun Violence Archive, a non-profit that tracks shootings via media reports and law enforcement records, show that in the first 200 days of 2017 the carnage has only gotten worse.

In the first 200 days of 2014, for instance, the Archive's team of researchers tallied 6,206 gun deaths, not counting suicides. Three years later that figure has jumped by well over one-third, to 8,539 fatalities.

Since 2014, total firearm injuries are up 50 percent. Shootings of children are up by nearly 30 percent. Reports of defensive gun use have doubled.

Trump's rhetoric aside, there's little a president can do in his first six months in office to influence violent crime trends in any direction. The Archive also doesn't offer any speculation about what's driving these numbers. "We provide very little analysis, and that's intentional," the group's founder Mark Bryant recently told the Lexington Herald-Leader. "We want people to be able to draw their own conclusions."

Other research has found that the nationwide homicide increase of recent years masks considerable regional variation. In many major cities, like Baltimore, Chicago and Cleveland, homicides are rising sharply. In others, like New York, homicides are actually falling.

The Gun Violence Archive's numbers suggest that in 2017, gun homicides are rising faster in some cities than they're falling in others. A small portion of this rise may be attributable to more media attention and better measurement techniques. But in the past few years the Gun Violence Archive's fatality numbers have tracked closely with the slower, more deliberative data from official sources like the CDC and the FBI.

Attorney General Jeff Sessions has made reducing violent crime a priority for the Department of Justice. He created a special task force on the topic, charged with delivering recommendations to the Attorney General's office by this week.

Sessions has taken several concrete steps so far intended to reduce homicides and violent crime, including increasing the use of mandatory minimum prison sentences, boosting the use of civil asset forfeiture to take property from suspects before they're convicted or charged with wrongdoing, and threatening to withhold federal funding from so-called "sanctuary cities."

None of these interventions are likely to have a significant effect on gun violence. Research has shown mandatory minimum sentences have little deterrent effect on violent crime. On asset forfeiture, one recent study found that expanding the practice reduced property crimes somewhat but had no effect on violent crime. Cracking down on "sanctuary cities" may even turn out to be counterproductive, as research has shown they tend to be less violent than cities without such policies in place.

Research has shown repeatedly, however, that one of the chief risk factors for gun crime is the availability of guns: more guns, more crime. Under the Obama administration, perpetual fears of pending crackdowns on gun ownership (that never materialized) helped drive record numbers of gun sales, putting millions more firearms in circulation.

Under Trump, however, fears of federal gun-grabs have subsided, driving gun sales down as a result. If that trend continues, it may prove to have more of a concrete effect on gun violence than any policy his administration pursues.

Christopher Ingraham writes about politics, drug policy and all things data. He previously worked at the Brookings Institution and the Pew Research Center.

Post RecommendsThe argument, first at a gas station and then outside a home, started over missing car keys.

In the early hours of Monday morning, police stepped in to quell the dispute between Allen Cashe and his girlfriend, Latina Herring, at a Sanford, FL, gas station. Then hours later they responded to a 911 call for an "aggravated battery" and found Cashe arguing with Herring outside on the front yard of her home, WFTV 9 reported.

Just after 6 a.m. that day, the police were summoned once again, but this time they found a blood bath. "The scene was one of the worst scenes our investigators have ever walked into," Sanford police spokeswoman Bianca Gillett told reporters. "It was horrific."

Police say Cashe had shown up that morning armed with an AK-47-style assault weapon, kicked down the door and shot and killed Herring. He then shot her father and her two sons, 7 and 8 years old, who were sleeping on the couch. The 8-year-old subsequently died. Fleeing the scene, Cashe opened fire on two strangers, including an 18-year-old high school student waiting at a nearby bus stop.

That was Monday. One day before, in Cincinnati, OH, 17 people were shot at the Cameo nightclub when a “mini brawl” sparked gunmen to open fire on a crowd of approximately 200 revelers, according to WCPO Cincinnati. It marked the bloodiest shooting in the nation so far this year, according to Cincinnati.com and the Gun Violence Archive.

“The hospital was so crowded, all the seats were taken in the emergency room,” one local pastor told The Cincinnati Enquirer. “The emergency room was literally standing room only." The city’s mayor said the gun rampage marked “one of the worst days in the history of Cincinnati.”

Here’s what was so strange about the media coverage for the mass shootings that unfolded within one day of each other, and which involved 23 shooting victims: There wasn’t very much news coverage at all, outside of the local press attention.

For instance, The New York Times did not cover either gun rampage this week, according to search via Nexis. (Two AP articles were aggregated on the Times' website.)

Broadcast news coverage of the Cincinnati nightclub mass shooting and Sanford shooting was equally light, according to a review of transcripts in Nexis and Snapstream for the terms "Cincinnati" or "nightclub" and "Sanford." The Florida shooting was mentioned on broadcast news just once, on ABC World News Tonight on Monday. CBS mentioned the nightclub tragedy just three times, including during Sunday's evening news broadcast and again Monday morning during CBS This Morning and CBS Morning News. ABC ran two segments on Sunday on the shows Good Morning America and World News Sunday, while NBC mentioned the shooting on its Sunday and Monday editions of Today. The outlets appear to have moved on from 2017's highest victim shooting as of Monday morning.

The timid coverage of these shootings reminds us the extent to which horrific news, and specifically horrific gun-related news, gets quietly tabled and pushed aside.

Gun violence in America represents a raging health epidemic, but you’d never know it based on the news coverage.

That’s important because how can a nation have a debate about gun violence when even mass shootings aren't thoroughly covered as big news?

And please note this: Virtually all of the 23 victims in both the Florida and Ohio gun rampages were people of color. Is it possible the national news media would have devoted more time and resources to the Cincinnati gun rampage if it had occurred at a mostly white nightclub on a college campus? I certainly think it’s likely.

Meanwhile, what else would have triggered wildly different media responses to the Sanford and Cincinnati killings? Answer: any hint of a terrorism angle.

On that front, news consumers know the drill: When a mass shooting involves the possibility of terrorism, media outlets compete to see who can produce more reports and, usually, who can produce the most heated analysis. For instance, it sure seemed to me like cable news interest in the mass shooting at the Fort Lauderdale, FL, airport in January dropped when it became clear that the gun massacre was committed by a homegrown shooter unrelated to jihad terror.

There’s obviously been a normalization over the years for mass shootings, as the lacking coverage from Sanford and Cincinnati indicates. And who benefits from that normalization? The National Rifle Association and the Republican Party, which supports the gun group’s every radical initiative.

Of course the NRA and the GOP don’t want the press to treat gun violence as the health crisis that it is. And of course the NRA and the GOP do want to the press to casually look away as mass shootings unfold with random deadliness. The conservative movement is in favor of normalizing gun violence and of the media omitting context about the epidemic.

Many conservatives don’t want the press to constantly connect the dots between American gun rampages, or to chronically mention that roughly 100,000 people are shot in America each year. Or that each week, approximately 1,565 patients are treated in emergency rooms for firearm-related injuries. Or that among the world's 23 wealthiest countries, 87 percent of all children killed by guns are American children.

As of March 28, 2017, this year there have been:

-3,516 gun deaths

-6,748 gun injuries

-496 unintentional shootings

-71 mass shootings — Gun Violence Archive (@GunDeaths) March 28, 2017
Interestingly, just days before the deadly Florida and Ohio shootings, CNN.com did what more news outlets ought to be doing: It published a comprehensive piece that put American gun violence in perspective by detailing the extraordinary economic cost the country pays each year to treat our gun epidemic.

Note that the death toll is likely to rise in coming years because “patients are now more likely to die from a gunshot wound than they were even 10 years ago,” presumably thanks to the increasingly powerful and sophisticated guns being manufactured and sold in the U.S.

“To be blunt, instead of a 2-centimeter hole, you are seeing a 3-centimeter hole with more damage. And there are more wounds, so the team has to repair more damage," the study’s author told CNN.

Following the shootout in Cincinnati, where panicked clubgoers were forced to flee rampaging gunmen, the Cincinnati Enquirer stepped forward with a truth-telling editorial (emphasis added):

We hear a lot from politicians these days about the threat of a foreign enemy, yet terrorism happens every day on city streets around the country. This madness has to stop. Too many lives are lost every year in Cincinnati and nationwide to savage, mindless and inhuman gun violence. Mass shootings in America, tragically, are becoming too commonplace.

One way to address the madness is for the press to see the country’s gun violence for what it is -- a uniquely American epidemic.Yet another American community is reeling from a horrifying, fatal act involving a firearm.

On Monday, a gunman opened fire in a public library in Clovis, New Mexico, killing two people and wounding four others.

In response to Monday's shooting, Clovis Mayor David Lansford said, "We've been hit hard. We're a community that will get back up, but right now we're hurting."

Keep up with this story and more by subscribing now

This incident marked the 244th mass shooting in 2017, according to Gun Violence Archive. To put this into perspective, we are 240 days into the year. In short, the U.S. has had more mass shootings than days in 2017.

Gun Violence Archive defines a mass shooting as any incident in which "four or more shot and/or killed in a single event, at the same general time and location not including the shooter."

Data from Gun Violence Archive also shows there have already been more than 10,000 gun deaths this year.

By this point in 2016, there had been 234 mass shootings in the U.S., according to Gun Violence Archive.

With fervent 2nd Amendment-supporting Republicans in control of Congress and the White House, it's unlikely we will see much legislation aimed at curbing gun violence in the U.S. anytime soon. Even after a member of Congress was shot earlier this summer, the GOP has not appeared interested in addressing the issue with new restrictions.

But that doesn't necessarily mean the public isn't in favor of certain changes.

According to Pew Research Center, there is strong bipartisan support across America for policy proposals such as prohibiting individuals with mental illnesses from buying guns, barring gun purchases by people on federal no-fly or watch lists, and background checks for private gun sales and sales at gun shows.

Meanwhile, according to Pew, there are strong disagreements between Republicans and Democrats on issues like whether to let people carry concealed guns in more locations and to allow teachers and officials to carry guns in schools.Gun crime Mapping US gun murders at a micro level: new data zooms in on violence The Guardian is releasing a new set of nationwide data for 2015, which can be used to do analysis of how gun murder clusters within neighborhoods The Guardian found that half of the United States’ gun murders in 2015 were clustered in 127 cities. Photograph: Keith Srakocic/AP

We spend a lot of time talking about which cities see the most gun violence. But analyzing gun violence at the city level is very misleading. Gun violence is much more local than that.

Want to fix gun violence in America? Go local. Read more

The Guardian is releasing a new set of nationwide data for 2015 that maps gun murders at the micro level – down to the local census tract. You can use this data to do analysis of how gun murder clusters within neighborhoods in your city or state.

Our analysis was possible thanks to the not-for-profit Gun Violence Archive (GVA), which tracks shootings and gun deaths using media reports. This data set includes the latitude and longitude of each shooting incident. We mapped each of these geolocated gun murders to a census tract – which means that there’s a wealth of demographic data connected to each census tract, allowing you to analyze the levels of poverty, educational attainment and other factors in neighborhoods where gun murders happen.

This article contains the data we used to conduct this analysis. We invite you to download this data and use it for further analysis and reporting. If you use this data, please make sure to credit the Gun Violence Archive and the Guardian.



Using this data, the Guardian found that half of the United States’ gun murders in 2015 were clustered in 127 cities (Want to fix gun violence? Go local). We also found that violence was concentrated even further than simply the city level: census tract areas that contain just 1.5% of the country’s population saw 26% of America’s total gun homicides.

We appended a few other fields to the existing GVA data. Using the FCC’s Census Block Conversion API, we placed each incident within its proper census tract. With the census tract identified, we used the Five-Year American Community Survey 2014-2010 to find demographic information for the tracts. We also determined the land area of each tract with the US Census: Cartographic Boundary Shapefiles – Census Tracts.



We’ve also included a separate easy-to-use file of FBI murder data from 1985 to 2015.

If you have questions about the data, please email gundata@theguardian.com. If you use this data to do your own analysis – whether you’re a journalist or a community organization – please let us know, and send a link to your final project to gundata@theguardian.com, or contact our reporters directly: lois.beckett@theguardian.com and jamiles.lartey@theguardian.com.

Get the data

Each file is a .csv, which can be opened in Excel and Google Sheets, in addition to the text editor of your choice.

All GVA data is from 2015, but you can obtain data from 2014 to the present by going to their website or following them on twitter @gundeaths for daily updates.

Incident-level data – each row includes a gun homicide incident.

City-level data – each row includes a city or county (depending on how it was reported by the GVA), as well as counts for incidents and people killed.

Contact the Guardian securely Read more

Tract-level data – each row includes a census tract, as well as counts for incidents and people killed.

Previous stories have made use of UCR data, which we obtained from the FBI.

City-level murder data from 1985-2015 – each row is a city, and includes the murder rate and raw number of murders for each year from 1985-2015. Some years are missing for cities. National data on city murder statistics from 2016 will not be available from the FBI until the fall of 2017.

Download a description of all of the above data files with notes here.A man was shot Saturday afternoon (Feb. 17) in the Warehouse District, according to New Orleans Police.

The man was brought by a private vehicle to the hopsital, where he told police he had had been shot in the 800 block of Magazine Street, according to an NOPD alert issued just after 4 p.m.

Police were still on scene at 4:45 p.m. but were in the process of taking down the tape surrounding the crime scene. The street had already been reopened.

A large puddle of water could be seen in the intersection of Magazine and St. Joseph streets, where a passerby who declined to give her name said firefighters had recently washed away the victim's blood.

The hostess at a nearby restaurant said she had seen or heard the shooting but declined to give a comment. She said customers at the bar also saw the shooting.

An official at the scene, whose name is being withheld because he wasn't authorized to speak with the media, said the incident occurred at about 3:30 p.m. and involved three people who were shooting at each other.

He said he did not know where on his body the victim was shot, "but there was a lot of blood."

No further information was immediately available.FOREST PARK, Ga. — Police are trying to figure out what led up to the death of a man found shot in the backyard of a Forest Park home.

According to the Forest Park Police Department, officers responded to a home in the 500 block of Yancey Drive around 3:45 Saturday evening.

When police got there, they found the man's body in the backyard of the residence. Police said it appeared he had been shot at least once and died at the scene.

Investigators are still trying to work out details, but they said they are treating the case as a homicide.

No other details were available. Police are asking anyone with information to call the Forest Park Police Department at 404-336-4141 or the crime tip line at 404-608-2388.

© 2018 WXIAMan, 19, shot while driving in Hermosa on Northwest Side

A man was shot Saturday afternoon in the Hermosa neighborhood on the Northwest Side.

About 2:30 p.m., the 19-year-old was driving in the 4000 block of West Armitage when a person got out of a dark-colored sedan and fired shots, grazing the man in the head, Chicago Police said.

He was transported by ambulance to Stroger Hospital in good condition, according to police.

No one was in custody as Area North detectives investigated the shooting.Authorities are investigating a double shooting in Lowell, Massachusetts that left a man dead. The Middlesex district attorney's office said the shooting happened around 4:30 a.m. on O'Connell and Fay streets.

One Dead, One Injured in Lowell Shooting

Authorities are investigating a double shooting in Lowell, Massachusetts that left a man dead.

The Middlesex district attorney's office said the shooting happened around 4:30 a.m. on O'Connell and Fay streets.

One man, identified later as 24-year-old Lowell resident Anthony Luna, was taken to Lowell General Hospital, where he was pronounced dead.

The other male was hospitalized with non-life-threatening injuries. He has since been treated and released.

One Dead, Other Injured in Lowell Shooting

Authorities are investigating a double shooting in Lowell, Massachusetts that left a man dead.

The Middlesex district attorney's office said the shooting happened around 4:30 a.m. on O'Connell and Fay streets. (Published Saturday, Feb. 17, 2018)

People near the scene were surprised by the news this morning, calling the area a quiet part of Lowell.

"Crazy. We used to ride our bikes here late at night. Come home at like 3 in the morning. You don't expect something like that to happen, but what can you do?" said one resident.

The investigation into the deadly shooting by the DA's office, local and state police is ongoing.KEARNS — A man is in fair condition after being shot in the ankle Saturday, police say.

The shooting occurred around 10:30 a.m. when the 24-year-old victim got into an argument with another man in an industrial area located near 4820 S. 5100 West, said Unified Police Department Lt. Brian Lohrke.

After the shooting, the victim's girlfriend called 911, Lohrke said.

The suspect was described as a male, possibly Hispanic and 5 feet 5 inches tall with a stocky build, Lohrke said.

Police are trying to find more information about the exact location of the shooting.

The victim is expected to recover, Lohrke added.











Corbin police found two people dead Saturday afternoon on Ellison Street, which is located off North Depot Street.

Corbin Police Chief Rusty Hedrick confirmed that two people are dead as a result of gunshot wounds.

Police were called to the scene about 4:30 p.m.

Check back to thenewsjournal.net for more details as they become available.

Update: The two victims in the shooting have been identified as female.A man was transported to the hospital Saturday following a shooting near Loyola Lane and U.S. 183 in northeast Austin, according to Austin-Travis County EMS (ATCEMS).

ATCEMS said the man was transported to the hospital with serious, potentially life-threatening injuries.

#ATCEMSMedics transporting an approximate 30's year old Male to Dell Seton Medical Center with serious, potentially life threatening injuries from reported Gunshot Wounds at 8400 block of Garcreek Circle (14:01). No other information available. — ATCEMS (@ATCEMS) February 17, 2018

No other information was immediately available.

This is a developing story. We will keep you updated as more details become available.

© 2018 KVUEThe Wagoner County Sheriff's Office is currently in a standoff with a man who has barricaded himself in a home near South 273rd East Avenue and East 5th Street in Catoosa.

Officials received the call of a shots fired just before 5 p.m. When they arrived on scene, they found a man refusing to come out of a travel trailer.

The sheriff's office says the suspect began firing shots out of the home at about 5:30 p.m. Deputies returned fire.

At this time, officials say no one has been injured, but they are not certain of the suspect's condition inside the travel trailer.

WCSO says the suspect is still inside the home and they are unaware if anyone else is inside with him.

Officials say the man is facing multiple charges at this time.

This is a developing story.× Police investigating reported shooting in south Oklahoma City

OKLAHOMA CITY – Police are investigating a reported shooting in south Oklahoma City Saturday morning.

Oklahoma City Police told News 4 they responded to an apartment complex near S May Ave. and SW 68th St.

Police say one person was injured. Their injuries are non-life threatening.

There is no suspect description at this time.

The shooting is under investigation.Preliminary investigation revealed that the LAPD has been investigating numerous burglaries at the Pajarito Cliffs Site (PCS) county buildings, located at 1001 Camino Entrada, in Los Alamos, New Mexico. LAPD officers were conducting surveillance outside these buildings due to the burglaries.

Around 3:30 a.m. today, officers undercover observed a gray Jeep Patriot enter the parking lot near building #5. A male passenger dressed in black and holding bolt cutters exited the vehicle and approached the secured locked area. Officers in marked units with emergency equipment engaged approached the vehicle and gave commands for the male subject to stop and show his hands. The male suspect did not comply and ran to the passenger seat of the Jeep and the Jeep began to flee the scene. At that time, shots were fired by at least one LAPD officer.

The Jeep fled from officers onto NM State Road 502 heading toward Espanola. LAPD officers pursued the vehicle onto State Road 30. The pursuit continued on State Road 369 to US 84/285, and onto State Road 76. The vehicle turned onto Corlett Road and crashed. Two male subjects, the driver and passenger, fled on foot into a wooded area and were never subsequently located by the officers.

The Jeep was later identified as a stolen vehicle. It was towed from the scene and will be processed for evidence by the New Mexico State Police Crime Scene Team.

At this time there is no indication of any injuries received during this incident. It is believed that one PCS building was struck by gunfire. The specific details leading up to the shooting remain under investigation. The names of the officers involved will not be released until after all interviews have been conducted.Police roped off an area around Richmond Inn and Suites. (Source: Kelly Avellino/NBC12)

Rescue crews on the scene of a shooting Saturday morning. (Source: Kelly Avellino/NBC12)

A man has life-threatening injuries after a shooting Saturday morning.

The shooting happened just after 10 a.m. at the Richmond Inn and Suites at 6346 Midlothian Turnpike.

The victim was shot in the leg and transported by ambulance.

Police have not announced any suspects.

Copyright 2018 WWBT NBC12. All rights reserved.

Report an Error or Submit a Tip to NBC12Police investigate death on Raintree Cove; seeking person of interest

JACKSON, Tenn. — Around 1 a.m. on Saturday, Jackson police responded to a report of a shooting on Raintree Cove.

Officers arrived and found a 16-year-male who had been shot. The victim was transported to a local hospital by ambulance, where he later died from his injury.

Investigators have identified a person of interest in this incident. Police are seeking Zion D. Ross, 16, of Jackson, for questioning.

Ross is an escapee from the Department of Children’s Services custody, and he has an active warrant through the Jackson Police Department for Criminal Impersonation. Ross is a black male, 6′ 1”, and 155 pounds. Even though Ross is a juvenile, he was previously adjudicated an adult in Madison County Juvenile Court.

Investigators ask that anyone with information about this incident or the whereabouts of Ross call the Jackson Police Department Major Crimes Unit at 731-425-8410 or Crimestoppers at 731-425-8477.Fugitive leads police to seize drugs, stolen guns and thousands in cash

Police released this photo of the guns, drugs and cash seized during the operation. (Source: Metro Nashville Police Department)

The arrest of a man Thursday led Metro Police to two other suspects, as well as cash, drugs and stolen guns.

East Precinct undercover detectives located convicted felon and fugitive Cedric Doss, 25, at a car wash on Doverside Drive. He was taken into custody on felony community corrections violations warrants.

Police searched Doss’ car and found 12 oxycodone pills, one Xanax bar and more than $1,400 in cash.

While drafting a narcotics-related search warrant for Doss’ residence on Oakview Drive, they saw 27-year-old Keaire Kirkendoll, who lives at the home, and 34-year-old Gary McCree enter and come out with a large red bag.

The pair drove off and were later stopped on Brick Church Pike near Bellshire Drive. A police dog smelled narcotics inside the vehicle, and officers retrieved the red bag from the trunk.

That bag contained more than 3 pounds of marijuana, a baggy with seven prescription pain pills, two handguns (both of which were stolen) and $9,450 cash.

In a subsequent search of the Oakview Drive house, police found two loaded guns, a small amount of marijuana and $641 cash.

McCree, of Gallatin, is charged with gun possession during the commission of a felony, felony drug possession with intent to sell and being a fugitive from justice for drug violations in Michigan.

McCree is in jail in lieu of $326,000 bond.

Kirkendoll is charged with gun possession during the commission of a felony and felony drug possession with intent to sell. She is being held in lieu of $76,000 bond.

Doss is charged with three probation violations. Police say he is facing additional felony charges.

Copyright 2018 WSMV (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved.One man was transported to the hospital early Saturday morning after an argument led to a shooting in Antioch.

South officers responded to a shooting call at 3939 Apache Trail, where a man was found in his car with a gunshot wound to the middle of his back. The victim was transported to Vanderbilt Medical Center.

The victim told police that he was involved in an argument outside of Bar Billares Las Nenas and a suspect eventually shot him in the back. The victim then drove a short distance before police responded to the scene.

There are currently no suspect descriptions, but police are still investigating.

Copyright 2018 WSMV (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved.Baton Rouge police have confirmed to 9News they have launched an investigation after the body of a man was found at an abandoned apartment complex Thursday afternoon.

The discovery made at the Brandywine Condominiums on Darryl Drive around 12:45 p.m. on Thursday, February 15.

Officers tell WAFB they are investigating the case as a suspicious death.

On Friday, BRPD released more details, saying they have identified the victim as Isaac Cornish III, 31. He was found inside an apartment at the Brandywine complex, which is located on Darryl Drive.

Officials say Cornish died from multiple gunshot wounds. Anyone with information in the case is asked to call the Violent Crimes Unit at 225-389-4869 or call Crime Stoppers at 225-344-7867.

The condominiums, which have long been an eyesore, were condemned by the metro council in September 2017.

RELATED:

Copyright 2018 WAFB. All rights reserved.Baton Rouge police are investigating the death of a man after they found his body in a park Saturday.

BRPD spokesperson L'Jean McKneely said the victim was found lying on the ground with gunshot wounds around 10:30 a.m. at BREC's Cadillac Street Park.

Officials told WAFB's Carmen Farrish investigators believe the shooting happened overnight.

The East Baton Rouge Parish Coroner identified the victim as 19-year-old Dequantay Singleton. An autopsy will be conducted Monday.

Police Chief Paul Murphy and District Attorney Hillar Moore were present at the scene.

This investigation is ongoing. We will update this story with new information when it becomes available.

Copyright 2018 WAFB. All rights reserved.Copyright 2018 KXLY.com. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed without prior permission.

SPOKANE, Wash. - Three men were arrested and charged with first-degree robbery after breaking into a motel room on E. Sprague early Saturday morning.

At 2:15 a.m., a Spokane Police officer came into contact with a female running barefoot in the 1300 block of E. Sprague Avenue. The officer was told by the woman that a robbery just occurred inside of her motel room. She stated that three men forced their way into her room and one of the men pointed a gun at her and her boyfriend. The two other suspects were armed with a Taser-type device and pepper spray. All three suspects left the room after a search and stole some items.

The officer requested more units and a perimeter was established. A K9 unit was brought in to help track the suspects, who were found hiding under a deck a short distance away. They were taken into custody without incident.

21-year-old Benjamin M. Bass, 25-year-old Nakoa M. Walker-Kellum, and 31-year-old Kenneth A. Brower were booked into the Spokane County Jail for first-degree robbery. Bass also was booked on a charge f unlawful possession of a firearm and he had an outstanding burglary warrant. Bass and Brower have prior felony convictions.Two people were shot dead Saturday at mid-day (Feb. 17) in the Treme neighborhood, New Orleans police said. Both victims were male and appeared to have been wounded in the upper body.

The killings were reported at 11:30 a.m. at the intersection of St. Ann and North Prieur streets, where one body was found on St. Ann and the other in the front passenger seat of a silver Nissan sedan. The passenger-side window of the car was shattered, pieces of the glass sprayed on the ground where officers had placed two of nine evidence cones deployed for the investigation.

From a nearby doorway, one woman cried inconsolably: "My daddy, my daddy." Another woman cried while sitting against a police car, and a third woman, as she was led away from the crime tape by relatives, sobbed, "No. I don't want to go nowhere."

Residents said they heard about six gunshots. Through tears, one resident reflected on the violence coming four days after Mardi Gras: "A couple of days ago, this was the happiest place in the world," said the man, who would not give his name. "Now every day we've got to wake up to something like this."

Police spokesman Aaron Looney said the car's engine was still running when police arrived. FBI agents also were at the scene to investigate.

. . . . . . .

CORRECTION: Aaron Looney's name was misspelled in an earlier version of this story.LYNCHBURG - The Virginia State Police are investigating an officer-involved shooting in Lynchburg.

A man was shot by police but is expected to recover.



According to the Lynchburg Police Department the incident happened around 1:15 Saturday morning in the 2100 block of Link Road.

Officers with the Lynchburg Police Department observed an open front door at the home, announced their presence, encountered a man inside the home and fired their weapons.

A man who lived in the home was shot in the leg.

Lynchburg Fire Department personnel were immediately requested to respond. The man was transported to Lynchburg General Hospital for treatment of the non-life threatening wound.

The Lynchburg Police Department requested the Virginia State Police investigate this incident.

Per Lynchburg Police Department policy, the involved officers have been placed on administrative leave. No one else was injured during the course of this incident.

.



Copyright 2018 by WSLS 10 - All rights reserved.SAN ANTONIO - An 18-year-old was hospitalized after being shot on the North East Side Saturday morning.

According to San Antonio police, the teenager was outside of a home in the 7800 block of Hedrick Farm while using the Facebook App to set up a drug pick-up when two men pulled up and exchanged words with the victim.

Police said the two men in the car opened fire on the victim, hitting him in the hand and leg.

Police are still looking for the suspects involved.

Copyright 2018 by KSAT - All rights reserved.The Casselberry Police Department is investigating a fatal shooting at an apartment complex.

Authorities said John Murray shot his live-in girlfriend outside the Regency Oak Apartments on Monarch Circle around 11 a.m. on Saturday.

Advertisement

The pair was arguing inside their apartment where Murray punched a mirror, according to officials. Police said when the argument moved outside, Murray shot his girlfriend several times, killing her.

Murray was taken into custody without incident and transported to a hospital for treatment to his hand from punching the mirror.

He was later booked into the Seminole County Jail where he awaits charges.

The woman who was killed has not yet been identified.

The Casselberry Police Department continues to investigate.

This story is developing. WESH 2 News will bring you the latest information as it becomes available.Please enable Javascript to watch this video

MEMPHIS, Tenn. -- Police are investigating a mass shooting outside a Frayser nightclub that sent five people to the hospital.

Investigators say it happened just after 2 a.m. Saturday at Club Bosses on North Watkins Avenue.

Three men, ages 29, 31 and 37, are listed in critical condition and a 34-year-old man and 19-year-old woman are expected to survive, police say.

"That’s scary. It is scary," said Mohammed Alkabsh, who owns the Valero gas station next door. "To me like, just crazy, you know? For something to just pop up like this. I couldn’t believe it."

The 24-hour gas station had about five customers at the time, and Alkabsh said they ran inside and hit the floor, terrified they could end up caught in the crossfire.

"People came in here running and started laying down in here," he said. "I mean, it sounded crazy to me."

There are four surveillance cameras outside Alkabsh's store, which he hopes captured something.

"I’ve been here for two years, cool with everybody, we never had no problem," he said.

The nightclub is rated 4.9 out of five stars among Facebook reviewers, and many have commented on the safe environment and security.

But next door, Alkabsh said he’s not feeling quite as safe and secure anymore.

"It’s kind of hard now just to feel good, you know what I mean?” he said.

Police haven’t released the victims’ names.

Investigators say the shooter took off northbound on Watkins Avenue in a black four-door car.

If you know anything, you can call in an anonymous tip to Crime Stoppers at (901) 528-CASH.
