

CNN’s Chris Cuomo takes a commercial break alongside 2016 presidential candidate Hillary Clinton during a town-hall-style televised event at the University of South Carolina in February 2016. (Gerald Herbert/Associated Press)

In the wake of the school shooting in Parkland, Fla., this week, CNN host Chris Cuomo called out prominent Republicans on air by name, saying they were “afraid” to face questions about gun violence, unless they were on Fox News.

One politician, Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.), shot back with a photo of an at-the-time yet-to-air interview that he accused CNN of sitting on.

On Thursday’s edition of CNN’s “New Day,” which begins at 6 a.m., Cuomo asked, “What are they afraid of? The mistake we’ve been making is, we don’t say by name the lawmakers of that particular state and what they have done or refused to do. So this morning, let’s undo the mistake.”

Then he named Florida Gov. Rick Scott, Florida Sen. Marco Rubio and Cruz.

“Rubio calls it an inexplicable tragedy,” Cuomo said. “It is the most easily explained tragedy you can have. He knows why this happens. Then you have Ted Cruz. None would come on this morning. They’re all on Fox, the mothership, because they don’t want to be asked about this.”

On Friday morning, Cruz tweeted that he had spoken to CNN for 15 minutes on Thursday, and he turned the tables by asking why his interview hadn’t aired, in full.

Here's a pic of the @CNN interview — a 15-min exclusive given yesterday — that y'all still haven't aired… (While falsely claiming I'm "afraid" to talk to CNN.) https://t.co/Bo8AzsuGFX pic.twitter.com/sEtt4bTeUT — Ted Cruz (@tedcruz) February 16, 2018

Cruz, who Thursday on Fox said that more gun legislation is “not the right answer,” accused Democrats both of trying to politicize a tragedy and of blocking a 2013 bill intended to address the issue. The Grassley-Cruz bill, which proposed more resources for school safety, mental health and prosecuting illegal gun owners, failed in the Senate, 52-48. Both the National Rifle Association and nine Democrats supported it.

[April 2013: How almost all the gun amendments failed]

Cuomo, for his part, tweeted Friday that Cruz is brilliant and the offer to come on his show stands. The host wrote that Cruz declined an offer to come on his show but interviewed with another CNN program later Thursday. Fox News reported that the interview was to air during “The Situation Room” on Friday.

Be clear: Cruz and others were invited to come on @NewDay and be tested about how to stop these shootings. They declined. If Cruz or others did an intv with Cnn thereafter fine, but they didn’t when we asked. Period. Offer stands. Anytime. Anywhere. https://t.co/Wxy1KsutIo — Christopher C. Cuomo (@ChrisCuomo) February 16, 2018

A spokeswoman for Cruz and a spokesman for CNN did not immediately return requests for comment.

Senators on Capitol Hill weighed in on the Feb. 14 shooting in Parkland, Fla. (Jordan Frasier/The Washington Post)

Read more:

The FBI said it failed to act on a tip about the suspected Florida school shooter’s potential for violence

Copycat threats and rumors of ‘Florida pt 2’ put schools on high alert after shooting rampage

A would-be shooter tossed a coin to pick a school, police say. His grandmother foiled his plan.At least 17 people were killed in a shooting at a high school in Parkland, Fla., on Feb. 14. According to officials, this is how and when the events occurred. (Melissa Macaya,Patrick Martin/The Washington Post)

After the horror in South Florida, America’s teenagers returned to school — to routines that once felt safe.

But a palpable uneasiness descended on campuses across the country, after police say a 19-year-old walked into Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., on Wednesday and opened fire, leaving 17 people dead and scores of others wounded.

Adding to the anxiety: the spread of copycat threats on Snapchat and other social networks, where ominous messages proliferated.

Though most appeared to be hoaxes, administrators, police and school resources officers were on high alert Thursday and Friday, looking out — warily — for students motivated to threaten or engage in similar behavior.

(Broward County Sheriff’s Office)

In Arkansas, a Fayetteville High School student allegedly threatened to “shoot up the high school like they did in Florida” — and was arrested. “The police determined that the student did not intend to carry out the threat, but the act of making a threat against a school is against the law,” school officials said in a statement early Friday.

In southeastern Massachusetts, a social media post warned local high school students of a “Florida pt 2.”

And in South Carolina, a ninth-grade student at Broome High School in Spartanburg County was arrested after he allegedly posted a photo of himself on Snapchat wearing a mask and holding what appeared to be an assault rifle.

That picture was captioned, “Round 2 of Florida tomorrow,” sheriff’s officials told Fox affiliate WHNS.

When confronted by deputies, the student in the photo said he posted it in jest, police told the station.

Still, officials were not taking any chances, saying they were providing additional security at the school.

The Snapchat post spread well beyond South Carolina. In Brevard County, Fla., sheriff’s deputies arrested a 15-year-old girl accused of posting a similar threat and charged her with issuing a written threat to kill or do bodily harm, according to Florida Today. The post, which came from the Instagram username “brevardshooter,” appeared to target Space Coast Junior/Senior High School, reading, “I’m coming space coast watch out,” according to the newspaper.

Officials called it a hoax.

The Broward sheriff’s office, in the Florida county where the deadly Parkland shooting took place, said late Thursday that “variations of the post have continued to be circulated over social media with captions added to warn people not to go to various schools throughout South Florida.”

[No, there haven’t been 18 school shootings in 2018. That number is flat wrong.]

Friday morning brought more reports of copycat threats — prompting school closings in Gilchrist County, Fla., and Nutley, N.J.; temporary lockdowns in Onslow County, N.C., and Avon, Conn.; and an investigation at a middle school outside Atlanta.

A pep rally was postponed at a high school in Colorado Springs because of unsubstantiated rumors about possible violence, according to NBC affiliate KOAA-TV.

Following the “security threat” in New Jersey, Nutley Public Schools Superintendent Julie Glazer announced the school closures on Facebook, saying, “As both the Superintendent of the Nutley Public Schools and as a parent, and because of the nature of the world in which we live, there was no other decision to be made.”

New York Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo (D) said Friday that he had ordered State Police to patrol schools across the state amid “ ‘copycat’ threats made by students threatening violence and saying they would bring guns to school” on two separate campuses upstate.

Cuomo, who assured people that the situations were under control, said there are “serious legal consequences” for anyone making a threat — real or not.

“While the emotion, facts and consequences of yet another brutal gun attack continue to be processed, we must take a firm stand against any ‘copycat’ actors,” the governor said in a statement.

[A would-be shooter tossed a coin to pick a school, police say. His grandmother foiled his plan.]

In the aftermath of past shootings — including the one in 2012 at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn. — schools nationwide will feel “ultracautious” for an average of 10 to 14 days, said Mary Ellen O’Toole, a former FBI profiler. She said the increase in threats and false alarms in the days after a national tragedy is a noticeable phenomenon.

“There are certain things that occur in our culture that can provoke the desire to engage in similar behavior,” O’Toole said. “We know the crime of mass shootings, especially like this one, can provoke someone who’s already considering it.”

Administrators and police can’t look at a threatening post — such as the one from the Broome High School student — the day after a mass shooting and say, “Aw, there’s no way he’s going to do that,” O’Toole said. She said the rise of social media use among teenagers also contributes to the number of copycat threats, in part because the person posting the threatening message isn’t able to witness the emotions of those who see it.

“When you do it behind a computer screen, you don’t see that at the other end, you’ve put somebody in tears,” she said.

O’Toole said it’s also likely that children don’t realize the seriousness and finality of school shootings. That could be the case with a sixth-grader at Nova Middle School in Broward County, Fla., who was arrested Thursday and accused of writing a note threatening to shoot up her school.

“I will bring a GUN to school to kill all of you ugly a– kids and teachers,” the 11-year-old allegedly wrote, according to NBC Miami. “I will bring the gun Feb. 16, 18. BE prepared.”

The student allegedly slipped the threatening note under the assistant principal’s office door, NBC Miami reported. Administrators said that she later made a written confession.

Security experts have said that although there are no national statistics, they have seen a rise in threats at schools — and the response from officials forced to take them seriously.

“Schools are a soft target by their nature. They’re very difficult to control, with kids coming in and going out all the time,” Johnathan Tal, chief executive of the security consulting firm Tal Global, told The Washington Post in 2015. “And it’s not just the deranged high school student or middle school student you have to worry about. It’s a really attractive target for terrorists because it’s an emotional target.”

[ARCHIVES: After Newtown shooting, mourning parents enter into the lonely quiet]

Another Broward County school, North Broward Preparatory School, was put on lockdown after a teacher sent a text message that said she thought she heard shots, according to Fox affiliate WSVN. Police went classroom to classroom conducting a search, then lifted the lockdown and reported a false alarm. While responding to the incident, a Broward sheriff’s deputy accidentally shot himself in the leg, according to ABC affiliate WPLG.

Officials said a student at Sandy Springs Middle School, near Atlanta, posted a threat against his school on social media, which also made its way to students at the nearby high school, according to NBC affiliate WXIA. Authorities did not describe the threat but said that the middle-school student was taken into custody.

In Brooklyn, two 16-year-old boys threatened to open fire at their school less than two hours after news broke of the South Florida shooting, the New York Daily News reported. Police said that about 4 p.m. Wednesday the teenagers posted two photos online: One showed a boy holding a rifle, with the caption, “We’re gunning down tmrw,” while the other showed a boy in a black ski mask, with a caption that read, “Don’t come to school tomorrow,” according to the Daily News. In the second photo, two fire emoji replaced the boy’s eyes.

One of the boys was arrested at his home Thursday, and the other turned himself in to authorities, according to the Daily News.

In Hamilton, Ohio, police arrested a student at Ross High School who sent “a post on social media referring to the recent school shooting in Florida,” Ross Township police said in a statement. The student faces a felony charge of inducing panic and was being held at the Butler County Juvenile Detention Center, police said.

Students at B.M.C. Durfee High School in Fall River, Mass., were warned in an anonymous social media post not to go to school Friday morning because it would be “Florida pt 2,” according to the Providence Journal.

Classes were not canceled, though school officials said that additional security measures had been put in place to protect students.

“It’s always a little nerve-racking as a parent to get a call like that,” Melissa Panchley, a parent at the school and former school committee member, told the Providence Journal. “But we need to continue to live the way we live. It is really sad this is the society we live in today. It’s not surprising. That’s sad that it isn’t surprising.”

[The legacy of Newtown: Lockdowns, active-shooter training and school security]

Other incidents involving guns and schools Thursday include:

The arrest of a 13-year-old at Nichols Junior High School in Arlington, Tex., who allegedly threatened to shoot up his school with an AK-47 assault rifle, according to Fox 4 News.

The arrest of two students at Palm Beach Lakes High School in West Palm Beach, Fla., who allegedly brought guns to school, according to the Palm Beach Post.

The arrest of a male student at Clarksburg High School in Clarksburg, Md., who allegedly brought a loaded handgun to school, according to Montgomery County police.

The arrest of a 16-year-old student at Marcus High School in Flower Mound, Tex., who allegedly brought a weapon to school, according to school officials.

The arrest of a student at South Garland High School in Garland, Tex., who allegedly brought an unloaded gun to school, according to ABC affiliate WFAA.

The arrest of a Plano West High School student in Plano, Tex., who allegedly brought an unloaded handgun to school, according to WFAA.

The arrest of a student at Lee’s Summit North High School in Lee’s Summit, Mo., who allegedly brought an unloaded gun to school according to KMBC.

The arrest of a 15-year-old student at Fox High School in Arnold, Mo., for allegedly making what police called a “terroristic threat,” according to NBC affiliate KSDK.

This post has been updated.

Read more:

A loud, new voice after the latest school shooting: Kids wanting to know why adults hadn’t done more

Accused Fla. school shooter confessed to the rampage that killed 17, police say

The lives lost in the Parkland school shooting

The AR-15: ‘America’s rifle’ or illegitimate killing machine?Our hearts go out to the victims and families of the #FloridaShooting. #America is a society destroying itself from… Posted by Anglican Parish of Gosford on Wednesday, February 14, 2018

The rector at the Anglican Parish of Gosford, in Australia’s Central Coast, is not just controversial: By many accounts, the Rev. Rod Bower defies conformity and resists many of the stringently conservative views of his church.

He once said this to his fellow Christians, via a roadside billboard that serves as his megaphone: “DEAR CHRISTIANS, SOME PPL ARE GAY. GET OVER IT. LOVE GOD.” Bower is also a strong advocate of Muslim migration, a defender of refugees and a believer in climate change. He has made his views widely known, much to the dismay of some in his congregation who would prefer that he keep quiet about politics. But Bower, who further amplifies his message on social media, is far from staying silent.

His latest message on the church’s popular billboard is a swipe at the United States in light of the Valentine’s Day massacre of 17 people at a Florida school: “WHEN WILL THEY LOVE THEIR KIDS MORE THAN THEIR GUNS”

In a Facebook post of a photo of the billboard, Bower described the United States as “a society destroying itself from within,” a declining empire that “can never be great again.”

“A culture that loves guns more than children has no future other than corruption, decline and death,” Bower said.

Australia has some of the most stringent gun laws in the world. Parliament passed strict gun control legislation in 1996, after a gunman opened fire in a Tasmania cafe, then hunted down more people in his car, killing a total of 35 and wounding several others. The National Firearms Agreement banned the possession, manufacture and sale of all semiautomatic firearms and pump-action shotguns other than in “exceptional circumstances,” notably military and police use. It also mandated that applicants wait 28 days from the time they obtain a permit to the time they buy a weapon.

Australia has not had a mass shooting, defined as five victims or more, since the law’s passage — a fact that many in the American media have repeatedly brought up, usually in the aftermath of mass shootings in the United States.

[‘AMERICAN NIGHTMARE’: Australians react to fatal police shooting in ‘very risky’ United States]

This isn’t the first time Bower has criticized the United States. Days after President Trump’s inauguration he posted: “WE MUST LEARN FROM AMERICA’S GREAT MISTAKE.”

Trump’s election and the nationalist sentiment he’s inspired are a “dark cloud that has engulfed the United States,” Bower wrote in a lengthy Facebook post.

“The United States has made the mistake of following a leader who uses a form of populism to manipulate an already anxious populace,” he wrote.

Another example is his swipe at White House counselor Kellyanne Conway: “ALTERNATIVE FACTS. WHAT THE!”

But perhaps Bower’s more headline-grabbing billboard messages were about his stance on social justice issues, religion, equality and national politics.

A few examples:

“MARRIAGE EQUALITY. FOR GOD’S SAKE JUST DO IT” (This was posted around the time Australian leaders were debating whether same-sex couples should be allowed to marry. The Australian Parliament legalized same-sex marriage last December.)

“IF ONLY REFUGEES WERE GREYHOUNDS” (The billboard pokes fun at the state of New South Wales’s apparent concern over its greyhound racing industry.)

And this: “DUTTON IS A SODOMITE.” The message was referring to Peter Dutton, Australia’s immigration minister, who was criticized last fall for suggesting that refugees headed to the United States from the island of Manus, which is part of Papua New Guinea, were not living in hardship because they had luxury items from Armani. Bower explained in a Facebook post that the “sin of Sodom” is not about homosexuality, but about lack of hospitality.

[Anglican Communion suspends the Episcopal Church after years of gay rights debates]

In an interview last week with a New Zealand radio station, Bower said he does not believe that the church should be passive, especially about politics.

“Politics is simply the way we human beings organize each other. So yeah, I think everybody ought to be involved in politics … Religious leaders have a responsibility, I think ethically and morally, to speak into the life of the nation,” Bower said, adding later: “While I think the church always should be involved in politics … I think it should never be involved in government.”

While Bower’s outspoken attitude makes him stand out among the high-collar clergy, he is not necessarily alone in the Anglican community in his beliefs. The Anglican Parish of Gosford is part of the Anglican Church of Australia and the Anglican Communion, the third-largest Christian group in the world, with some 85 million members. And the Communion has long held to traditional views, such as marriage being strictly a union between a man and a woman. But in early 2016, it suspended the Episcopal Church, its U.S. branch, following years of heated debate with the American church about homosexuality, same-sex marriage and women’s role in society.

Bower, who’s also an ambassador for the Refugee Council of Australia, is not without critics. The assistant archbishop of the Anglican diocese of Melbourne, for example, criticized him for his billboard post about Dutton and called it a “personal slur on a government minister.”

And in an interview with News.com.au, Bower said he’s been trolled on social media and has received physical threats. In August 2016, anti-Islam protesters dressed in Islamic garb interrupted Bower’s Sunday service.

“When I first began speaking out, it was a tense time, the letters to the top levels of the church were flying thick and fast,” Bower said. “There must be a whole room dedicated to letters complaining about me.”

Lindsey Bever and Sarah Pulliam Bailey contributed to this report.

Read more:

Australian conservatives took on gun control. It worked.

Accused South Florida school shooter confessed to rampage that killed 17 people, police say

How Australia beat the gun lobby and passed gun controlFORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. — Hundreds of students, teachers and residents filled the terrace of the Broward County federal courthouse on Saturday, three days after a 19-year-old gunman wielding an AR-15 left 17 students and educators dead and scores more injured at nearby Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School.

Their echoing chants of “enough” and “not one more” weren’t solemn — they were seething. None, perhaps, more so than Emma Gonzalez.

“If the president wants to come up to me and tell me to my face that it was a terrible tragedy and how it should have never happened and maintain telling us that nothing is going to be done about it, I’m going to happily ask him how much money he received from the National Rifle Association,” declared Gonzalez, a senior at Douglas. “To every politician who is taking donations from the NRA, shame on you! If you actively do nothing, people will continue to end up dead.”

Typically, the public gatherings in the days following a mass shooting are solemn, prayerful events. But time and time again, the events here in the days since Wednesday’s shooting have boiled over with righteous anger.

[ ‘People are angry’: Pain turns political in Parkland after school shooting ]

In Gonzalez’s nearly 10-minute address — her black tank top and tightly cropped haircut barely visible behind podium microphones that stood nearly as tall — she slammed by name senators who have proposed softening gun laws. Every few moments, the senior raised her bracelet-covered right arm to wipe tears from her eyes. In her left hand she clutched her speech, written out by hand on a stack of college-ruled paper.

She led the crowd in chants of “No more BS!”

Gonzalez was one of half a dozen student speakers at the rally, many of whom noted that despite years of disciplinary issues, Nikolas Cruz, their former classmate who police say has admitted to carrying out the shooting, was able to purchase a gun.

“This isn’t just a mental health issue!” Gonzalez said, her voice breaking into a scream. “He wouldn’t have harmed that many students with a knife!”

Wednesday’s shooting in Parkland, Fla., is just the latest addition to a long list of American mass and school shootings, tracing back to Columbine High School in 1999. An ongoing Washington Post analysis has found that more than 150,000 students attending at least 170 primary or secondary schools have experienced a shooting on campus since Columbine.

“We’ve had too many national tragedies across our country, and it’s time for this to stop,” declared Stacey Kagan, Parkland’s vice mayor. “This can never happen again.”

In the moments after the shooting, much of the nation was moved by the graphic, frantic videos taken in real time by students who were inside the school. And in the days since, the students themselves — in tweets, Facebook posts, and television interviews — have been among the loudest voices demanding changes to gun laws.

[ We’re used to experiencing mass shootings online. But Parkland brought us into the classroom. ]

“What’s going to be different this time is that the young people are going to be driving the change,” Robert Runice, the Broward County schools superintendent, said in an interview. “What I want to see happen next is that this be a continued, sustained movement that includes massive voter registration, awareness and results and legislation to deliver common-sense gun laws.”

Among the student speakers were Cameron Kasky, 17, one of the students who launched “Never Again MSD,” which has amassed nearly 35,000 followers on Facebook in just three days, and Delaney Tarr, 17, who hid in a closet during the shooting and vowed to commit the rest of her life to reforming American gun laws.

“My innocence, our innocence has been taken from us,” Tarr said tearfully. “Our childhood is gone because that man … despite being tipped off to the FBI multiple times, was able to legally purchase an AR-15. … Because of these gun laws, people that I know died. … Because of the systematic failure of our government, at every level, people are dying every day.”

Delaney Tarr, a senior at Marjory Stoneman Douglas HS, addresses the crowd at the gun control rally in Fort Lauderdale. “I’ve had enough of thoughts and prayers, the hashtags, all of it.” pic.twitter.com/YfMTL892Af — Patrick Riley (@PatJRiley) February 17, 2018

Among the policy changes they urged was a federal ban on assault weapons — specifically the AR-15, which has been used in a number of mass shootings — and for the electoral defeat of politicians who take money from the National Rifle Association, the most prominent group in the powerful gun lobby.

“Never again do I want to text my mom “I love you” in fear of never getting to say it again to her face,” said Ariana Ortega, 17, who was inside the school at the time of the shooting. “Never again should parents send their children to school only for them to never return home.”

State Sen. Gary Farmer, a Democrat who represents Fort Lauderdale, told the crowd that he toured the school Friday and spoke with the police captain overseeing the investigation. Farmer said that Cruz was carrying magazines that held 30 to 40 rounds each, and that he fired a total of 160 shots — 78 of them on the school’s first floor.

“There is no need for those high-capacity magazines or these killing machines,” said Farmer, who went on to call for the creation of a federal gun registry and who decried inaction from his colleagues in Florida’s state government on gun-control legislation, which prompted furious “vote them out” chants. “And you know what’s ironic, while our elected officials fail to act, we have brave students who are leading the way.”

More from The Post:

Outside NRA headquarters, hundreds gather in vigil and protest

No, there haven’t been 18 school shootings in 2018. That number is flat wrong.

Florida shooting spurs copycat threats, lockdowns, arrestMedia and police personnel are seen at dusk near Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School on Saturday in Parkland, Fla, where a shooting Wednesday left 17 dead. (Matt McClain)

Florida’s state social services agency investigated Nikolas Cruz’s home life more than a year before police say he killed 17 people at his former high school, closing the inquiry after determining that his “final level of risk is low,” despite learning that the teenager had behavioral struggles and was planning to buy a gun, according to an investigative report.

The investigation detailed several unnerving behaviors from Cruz, including that he had cut his arms on Snapchat, had a Nazi symbol and a racial epithet on his backpack and intended to purchase a gun for unknown reasons, according to a Florida Department of Children and Families report obtained by The Washington Post. Ultimately, the investigation was closed in November 2016, just months before Cruz bought the AR-15 assault-style rifle that police say he would later use in the massacre at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla.

[The lives lost in the Parkland school shooting ]

The state social services probe was the latest in a series of revelations about how Cruz’s pattern of worrisome — and sometimes violent — behavior had prompted concerns and had come to the attention of authorities in the past few years, including school officials, state social services officials and federal law enforcement authorities. Though aware of the warning signs, those same officials were unable to stop Cruz from buying a gun or to intervene before he allegedly returned to his former school on Wednesday and opened fire on several classrooms.

[The FBI said it failed to act on a tip about the suspected Florida school shooter’s potential for violence ]

Across South Florida and beyond, local and federal authorities have faced intensifying questions over why they failed to act on the red flags. The FBI had drawn the most scrutiny since it acknowledged Friday that the bureau received a tip in January that Cruz might attack a school and then never investigated that warning. The Broward County Sheriff’s Office also said Friday that police had received about 20 calls for service related to Cruz in recent years.



Local resident Steve Zipper visits a makeshift memorial in Pine Trails Park for the victims of the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School shooting victims. (Matt McClain)

The missed warnings have taken an ominous shape in hindsight: The FBI said in a statement Friday it received a tip from someone close to Cruz who was concerned about his “gun ownership, desire to kill people, erratic behavior, and disturbing social media posts, as well as the potential of him conducting a school shooting.” The DCF report said that more than a year earlier, state officials were told of Cruz’s intention to purchase a gun.

[‘People are angry’: Pain turns political in Parkland after school shooting ]

The DCF report said that the agency began looking into Cruz in September 2016, four days after he turned 18. The report said that Cruz was viewed as “a vulnerable adult due to mental illness,” stating that he has depression and had been taking medication in the past. This report’s findings were first made public by the South Florida Sun-Sentinel.

Officials with DCF have not publicly released the report but have petitioned a court for permission to disclose “confidential records that pertain to an investigation of alleged abuse, neglect or exploitation of a vulnerable adult.” A DCF spokeswoman has said that Cruz had no child-welfare history with the state agency and said Saturday that the state investigation in 2016 was to determine whether Cruz was safe and had access to necessary services.

“While the APS report related to this individual remains confidential pending a court order for release, we have reviewed the circumstances surrounding the 2016 case,” DCF Secretary Mike Carroll said in a statement. “Mental health services and supports were in place when this investigation closed. We look forward to Monday’s hearing, where we will ask that these records are released so the public can have access to this important information.”

The investigators who wrote the report could not be reached for comment, and one counselor mentioned in the report declined to comment when reached Saturday.

Investigators appeared to be looking into Cruz’s home situation because he was deemed a “vulnerable adult,” and they were determining whether he was being treated well and whether he was taking his medication. Investigators found no reason to think he was being mistreated and found that he had support at home from his mother.

But in the allegation section of the report, investigators wrote that Cruz and his mother, Lynda, were arguing over paperwork he needed to obtain an identification card. Cruz also was described as being depressed and having been seen on Snapchat cutting his arms.

The report said Cruz’s mother told officials that he was having issues because of a breakup with a girl who was cheating on him. Cruz’s mother also told investigators that she and the girl’s mother “told the kids they had to end the relationship because it was unhealthy for everyone,” the report states, without elaborating.

Cruz had gotten into a fight with another boy over the girl, his mother said, adding that the cutting began only after Cruz and the girl broke up.

Cruz’s mother also is quoted as saying that he did not have a gun at the time of the investigation, though he had an air gun that was taken away when he broke household rules about only firing it at targets in the back yard.

In a safety assessment, the report said the level of risk to Cruz was low because he “has services already in place” and “resides with his mother, attends school and receives counseling.” Cruz’s mother died of pneumonia in November, relatives said, while Broward County Public Schools officials say he was expelled from Douglas last year for unspecified disciplinary issues.

According to the report, Cruz’s mother said her son and their family have never had “issues with other races or issues with racism.” She also said Cruz claimed he did not know what the drawings on his backpack meant.

The investigation was closed less than two months after it began, concluding that there were “no indicators to support the allegations of inadequate supervision or medical neglect.” The report does not say who made the allegations that prompted the probe.

Attorneys representing Cruz acknowledge his guilt, but they have assailed the missed warnings that piled up over the years before the bloodshed at Douglas.

“The system that’s designed to identify folks that are posing a threat to themselves and more importantly to others, it failed,” said Gordon Weekes, the chief assistant Broward County public defender and one of the attorneys representing Cruz. “It just utterly failed. . . . With all these failures in the system that should have recognized a clear cry for help, the system did not work the way it was designed.”

Since the shooting, Parkland has mourned the dead, who included 14 students and three school staffers. The region also has seen a surge in anti-gun activism and anger, highlighted by hundreds of infuriated students, teachers and residents who gathered outside the federal courthouse in Fort Lauderdale on Saturday, chanting “enough” and “not one more.”

Defense attorneys have said that Cruz will plead guilty to the shooting if prosecutors agree not to seek the death penalty, arguing that it would not be right to execute someone who slipped through so many cracks.

Michael J. Satz, the state attorney for Broward County, said his office would not formally announce whether it will seek a death sentence until further along in the investigation, saying that now is a time to let families mourn. But he also said Saturday that the rampage “certainly is the type of case the death penalty was designed for.”

Sarah Larimer, Emma Brown and Julie Tate in Washington and Wesley Lowery in Fort Lauderdale contributed to this report.President Trump late Saturday night criticized the FBI for failing to act on a tip that might have prevented the recent massacre at a high school in Parkland, Fla., and said the bureau was devoting too much time to its investigation of his presidential campaign.

“Very sad that the FBI missed all of the many signals sent out by the Florida school shooter,” Trump said in a Tweet. “This is not acceptable. They are spending too much time trying to prove Russian collusion with the Trump campaign — there is no collusion. Get back to the basics and make us all proud!”

The president’s comment marks the first time he has weighed in on the bureau’s failure to investigate a Jan. 5 tip about 19-year-old Nikolas Cruz, who this week was charged with shooting and killing 17 people at Parkland’s Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School.

The FBI acknowledged the tip on Friday, saying a person close to Cruz had warned a call taker on the bureau’s general tipline that the young man had a desire to kill and might attack a school. The bureau said that information was not passed to agents in the field for investigation — an apparent breach of protocol.

The resources devoted to the Russia case should not have had any direct effect on the FBI’s response in Florida because the tip about Cruz, although reported to a call-center supervisor, never reached agents who would do an investigation, officials have said.

Officials said in press conference on Feb. 16 that the FBI failed to act on a tip about the suspected Florida school shooter's potential for violence. The FBI said it would conduct an internal review of its procedures. (Reuters)

Still, the incident comes at a precarious time for the FBI. Conservative lawmakers already had been reviewing the bureau’s handling of two hotly charged political matters: the probe of possible coordination between the Trump campaign and Russia to influence the 2016 presidential election; and the now-closed investigation of Hillary Clinton’s use of a private email server while she was secretary of state.

On Friday, the chairs of three powerful congressional committees that oversee the bureau sent letters demanding briefings on the FBI’s Florida misstep, while others lambasted the bureau for its apparent failure.

[The FBI failed to act on a tip about the suspected Florida school shooter’s potential for violence]

“The fact that the FBI is investigating this failure is not enough,” Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) said in a statement. “Both the House and Senate need to immediately initiate their own investigations into the FBI’s protocols for ensuring tips from the public about potential killers are followed through. Lawmakers and law enforcement personnel constantly remind the public that ‘if you see something, say something.’ In this tragic case, people close to the shooter said something, and our system utterly failed the families of seventeen innocent souls.”

The FBI declined to comment on the various congressional requests.

While lawmakers and federal law enforcement officials assessed their response, state authorities were left to prepare for one of the state’s highest-profile prosecutions in recent memory. Michael J. Satz, the state attorney for Broward County, said Saturday that the incident was “the type of case the death penalty was designed for,” though his office would not formally announce whether it will seek such a sentence so families have time to mourn.

Trump has been highly critical of investigators’ actions in both of those cases, and some in the bureau have worried his persistent attacks might do lasting damage to the premier federal law enforcement agency’s reputation.

Florida Gov. Rick Scott (R) seized on the FBI’s failure to investigate Cruz and called Friday for FBI Director Christopher A. Wray to resign.

“Seventeen innocent people are dead and acknowledging a mistake isn’t going to cut it,” Scott said in a statement.

[Inside the FBI: Anger, worry, work — and fears of lasting damage]

Scott’s call, though, did not immediately seem to gain wide traction. Trump, for example, did not mention Wray by name in his Tweet late Saturday. Florida Attorney General Pam Bondi (R), who, like Scott, is an ally of Trump, said on Fox News, “The people who had that information and did not do anything with it, they are the ones that need to go.”

Republican leaders who oversee the FBI, while highly critical of the bureau, also did not immediately call for the director to step down.

Rep. Bob Goodlatte (R-Va.), chair of the House Judiciary Committee, and Rep. Trey Gowdy (R-S.C.), chair of the House Oversight Committee, sent a letter to Wray demanding that the bureau brief the committees by no later than March 2 on why the agency did not act on a January tip about the suspected shooter and his propensity for violence. Sen. Charles E. Grassley (R-Iowa), chair of the Senate Judiciary Committee, also asked that the bureau brief his committee staffers by the end of next week.

Rep. Val Demings (D-Fla.) said of the governor’s call for Wray to resign: “He does not want to talk about gun control, so he is attacking the FBI.”

On Friday night, Trump had praised the FBI during a visit with law enforcement officials who responded to the shooting.

“We had a lot of FBI guys down here quickly. So great job; thank you very much,” Trump said to an FBI special agent who was among those at the Broward County Sheriff’s Office.

White House spokesman Hogan Gidley said Saturday on Fox News: “Director Wray obviously understood that there were mistakes made at the FBI. He made that clear; he took responsibility for it.”

Attorney General Jeff Sessions said he had directed his deputy attorney general, the No. 2 law enforcement official in the country, to look into the matter.

The bureau has in recent years faced significant scrutiny over whether it responds forcefully enough to possible threats. Agents had previously investigated the man who gunned down 49 people at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando in 2016 but ultimately concluded they could take no action against him. The FBI also had prior contact with the man charged with killing five people at Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport last year. He had walked into an FBI field office and made bizarre, though not threatening, statements.

The FBI’s call center in 2017 received more than 766,000 calls, though law enforcement officials said they do not believe the lapse in the Florida case was one due to too much volume, but rather a failure to appropriately assess the particular tip.

Broward County Sheriff Scott Israel said police had received about 20 calls for service in recent years regarding Cruz, whom neighbors knew to be troubled. He had been expelled from school, and the administration there sent an email to teachers with a vague suggestion of concern about him.

Howard Finkelstein, the Broward County public defender representing Cruz, said that multiple government agencies failed to prevent what was an avoidable tragedy.

“It is the most horrific crime I’ve ever seen,” Finkelstein said. “And I am overwhelmingly saddened that every single system failed, which means to me we don’t have a system. . . . If this person didn’t get anybody’s attention, nobody will.”

Ed O’Keefe contributed to this report.On a day when Parkland began burying its young dead, a dozen people stood on a street corner holding up “More Gun Control” signs as passing drivers honked and shouted in support.

“Look what we started,” said Carlos Rodriguez, 50, who was on his way to work when he stopped to join the protest on Friday. “Look at all these people. One match started a whole forest fire.”

This most peaceful and orderly of places has been devastated by the most violent and chaotic of acts. And amid the horse trails, bike paths and gated communities of a city that prides itself on “country elegance,” the response to a shooting Wednesday that killed 17 people at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School has been a raw, growing and furious burst of activism and demand for change.

Hundreds of people filled the terrace of the Broward County federal courthouse on Saturday, where their echoing chants of “enough” and “not one more” weren’t solemn — they were seething. None, perhaps, more so than Emma Gonzalez.

“If the president wants to come up to me and tell me to my face that it was a terrible tragedy and how it should have never happened, and maintain telling us that nothing is going to be done about it, I’m going to happily ask him how much money he received from the National Rifle Association,” Gonzalez declared. “To every politician who is taking donations from the NRA, shame on you! If you actively do nothing, people will continue to end up dead.”

In a nearly 10-minute address — her black tank top and tightly cropped haircut barely visible behind podium microphones that stood nearly as tall — Gonzalez slammed by name senators who have proposed softening gun laws. Every few moments, the Stoneman Douglas High senior raised her bracelet-covered right arm to wipe tears from her eyes. In her left hand she clutched her speech, written out by hand on a stack of college-ruled paper.

She led the crowd in chants of “No more BS!”

Gonzalez was one of half a dozen student speakers at the rally, many of whom noted that despite years of disciplinary issues, Nikolas Cruz, their former classmate who police say has admitted to carrying out the shooting, was able to purchase a gun.

“This isn’t just a mental-health issue!” Gonzalez said, her voice breaking into a scream. “He wouldn’t have harmed that many students with a knife!”

Grace Solomon, a city commissioner who is organizing a large group of parents and students to travel to Tallahassee and then to the District to demand “common-sense gun legislation,” said there’s been a palpable shift in the nature of her community.

“We’re not a politically charged community — this is new, because we’ve had enough,” Solomon said Friday.

“Parkland families have really involved parents; they are not going to take this sitting down,” she continued. “We have an army of moms who are tired of having their kids assaulted. Democrats and Republicans are coming together to find common ground we can bring to Tallahassee.”



City commissioner Grace Solomon fixes ribbons to trees Thursday before a candlelight vigil for the victims of the shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla. (Wilfredo Lee/AP)

Parkland, founded in 1963 on the swampy fringe of the Everglades, has long been a place of gentle ease with great schools, a well-educated and affluent population of about 32,000 people. It had no stores until the 1990s and still has only four stoplights — including one that just got left-turn arrows in the past couple of months.

Its violent crime rate is a tiny fraction of the rate statewide, and city spokesman Todd DeAngelis said police are more likely to be called for a trespassing alligator than for a murder.

[The FBI said it failed to act on a tip about the suspected Florida school shooter’s potential for violence ]

Even its politics have a scrupulously fair balance: Although officials said the city tends to lean Democratic, like all of Broward County, President Trump won one local precinct by 16 points in the 2016 election and narrowly lost four others.

But one of the deadliest school shootings in U.S. history has hit this city with a ferocity that has changed the calculation.

Every community responds differently to the mass shootings that have become so frequent in the United States. Dancing showgirls and chapel-wedding newlyweds were back in the streets of Las Vegas soon after a gunman sprayed bullets across a music festival in October, signaling a quick return to normalcy. In small-town Texas, a somber religiosity defined the aftermath of a church massacre that killed 26 in November.

But Parkland has responded with a call to activism — angry teachers, parents and teenagers demanding stricter guns laws, more government money for school security and better treatment for mental illness.

“This going to energize a lot of people to vote this year,” said Carl Hiaasen, a best-selling novelist and journalist who grew up in Plantation, just south of Parkland. “People are angry.”

At a vigil Thursday night in the palm-lined heart of Parkland, people broke into a spontaneous and enraged chant of “No more guns! No more guns!” Many were students, who are organizing on social media and calling for young people to lead the political charge.

Annabel Claprood, 17, was in Spanish class on Wednesday when she looked down at her phone. It was 2:32 p.m. — the moment, she says, she became a lifelong advocate of gun control and new campus safety laws. At that moment, the shooting started. She took shelter in her room and heard every shot.

Now, the 17-year-old has decided to travel to Tallahassee to begin pushing for new campus safety laws.

“They said every time something like this happens it’s not going to happen again, but it’s happening again and again, so we obviously are doing something wrong,” Claprood said.

“You should not have a gun at the age of 18,” said Claprood, who said it makes no sense that at 18 you can buy a gun but not drink alcohol.

[The lives lost in the Parkland school shooting ]

Florida has relatively few restrictions on gun ownership. Unlike California, for example, Florida does not require background checks for private gun sales. It does not regulate sales of assault-style weapons and large-capacity magazines (although federal law requires assault-weapon buyers from a licensed dealer to be at least 18). State laws also prohibit cities from passing gun restrictions.

Ashley Kurth, a culinary arts teacher at the high school, said her cooking class had just finished deep-frying shrimp when the gunfire began. She quickly locked the doors to her classroom and huddled with 65 students on the floor for 2½ hours until a SWAT team broke a window to rescue them.



Sol Angel, left, and Robert Lopez hold signs calling for greater gun control Friday in Coral Springs, Fla. (Matt McClain)

Less than 24 hours later, Kurth was consoling grieving teachers and students before a vigil at Pine Trails Park, a public recreational facility with turf playing fields, an amphitheater and high-end playground equipment. Many people arrived on bicycles or golf carts, using the community’s winding network of paved paths.

Kurth, 34, said she woke up the morning after shooting wanting to sever her lifelong ties to the Republican Party.

“Yesterday’s incident opened my eyes and changed my views in a lot of ways,” she said Thursday. “Before, I used to think, ‘Okay, let’s be moderate.’ But living through that, and experiencing that, and seeing the aftermath of what that was, something has to be done.”

Asked about Trump’s response to the shooting, Kurth sighed.

“You know, I know he does his best with what he can, but at the same time, I am disheartened a little bit to hear, once again, we are going to focus on the mental illness and getting these people help,” she said.

[We’re used to experiencing mass shootings online. But Parkland brought us into the classroom. ]

“What are you going to do about the people who are sane and out there with their right to bear arms that decide one day they just had enough?” she added.

Sarah Lerner, 37, an English teacher, said she believed young people were going to force change on the gun issue.

“Whether you are a right-wing Republican or a super-left liberal, we all want the same thing,” she said. “No one should be afraid to go to school, and we all want to live in a safe community, and I believe this community is going to unite to make that happen.”

Beam Furr, the mayor of Broward County, which includes Parkland, said he was eager to give young people a chance to push for new gun legislation.

“Those students who were at Douglas, they’re good kids, smart students. They don’t want this shooting to be their most enduring memory of high school,” he said. “Several of them have told me they want the memory to be something that they helped change. To let that be their legacy.”

Since the shooting, many people in Parkland who never expected to be involved in politics are suddenly finding themselves jumping right in.

“I am not a politician. [But] this made me angry. This happened in my back yard. I didn’t know how easy it is to get a gun in Florida,” said Caesar Figueroa, 43, who had two children at the school during the shooting. They lost a teacher and two friends.

“I really want to make a difference,” he said, calling for more stringent background checks for gun buyers. “I want to get involved and speak out.”

Jim Weiss, who has written a book about Parkland’s history, said Parkland’s activism comes from anger and confusion about how something so horrible could happen in a place so proud of its gentle nature.

“People are outraged that something like this could happen in the safest city in Florida,” said Weiss, 72. “This puzzle is missing some pieces. You know the way it should look, but you can’t find those last pieces. And those pieces are about weapons and dollars for treating mental health.”

Wesley Lowery in Fort Lauderdale and Renae Merle in Parkland, Fla., contributed to this report.Mother who took in accused gunman 'never would have let him into their house' if she knew anythingA student mourns the loss of her friend during a community vigil Thursday in Parkland, Fla. Despite strong public support for tougher gun background checks, Congress has been unable to agree on any new legislation. (Brynn Anderson/AP)

It’s been five years since the guns and immigration debates collided on Capitol Hill. This time, the results were even more unproductive.

In early 2013, weeks after a gunman killed 20 students and six educators at an elementary school in Connecticut, the Senate took up legislation that would have provided for enhanced background checks on gun purchases. That was followed by long consideration of a sweeping bill to provide a path to citizenship for millions of undocumented immigrants and enhanced border security.

The gun legislation foundered amid a Republican filibuster, and a few months later the Senate passed the immigration plan — only to see it go nowhere in the House.

Today, the Senate is stuck in a quagmire on a narrower immigration bill, to benefit hundreds of thousands of undocumented young immigrants brought here as children. The House has not even scheduled an immigration debate despite a looming March 5 deadline after President Trump’s cancellation of an Obama-era executive order providing temporary legal status for “dreamers.”

And on gun violence, after Wednesday’s mass shooting that left 17 dead at a Florida high school, neither House nor Senate leaders have shown any inclination to revisit any gun legislation.

1 of 69 Full Screen Autoplay Close Skip Ad × Photos from the aftermath and the scene of a shooting at a high school in Parkland, Fla. View Photos Gunfire broke out at the South Florida school shortly before students were dismissed. Caption Gunfire broke out at the South Florida school shortly before students were dismissed. Feb. 17, 2018 Resident Steve Zipper visits a makeshift memorial in Pine Trails Park in Parkland, Fla. for the victims of the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School shooting. Matt McClain/The Washington Post Buy Photo Wait 1 second to continue.

This inaction comes despite steady polling showing that more than 90 percent of voters want a tougher federal background check system for gun purchases. And on immigration, about 85 percent of voters support a legislative fix allowing dreamers to stay in the United States.

It’s left some lawmakers utterly confused as to why, even on issues that have overwhelming public support, Congress still does a face plant.

“It’s a big question. When you’ve got the answer, let me know,” said Sen. Patrick J. Toomey (R-Pa.), the lead Republican sponsor of the 2013 background check legislation.

Toomey still supports the legislation, which he co-sponsored with Sen. Joe Manchin III (D-W.Va.), but he indicated that there has been no change in the political dynamic on the issue over the past five years.

On Capitol Hill, little chance of a legislative response to latest mass shooting

In the House, Democrats never got a vote on any gun-control bill — in fact, ever since Republicans took the majority in 2011, the House Judiciary Committee has not held a hearing dedicated to gun violence issues.

“Not one single hearing,” Rep. Jerrold Nadler (N.Y.), the ranking Democrat on the committee, said Friday during a conference call urging new legislation. “Inaction on this issue is unacceptable.”

Hundreds of people rallied in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., for gun control, after a gunman killed 17 people at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School on Feb. 14. (AP)

After some thought, Toomey said there is no easy answer on guns and immigration even though polling shows that the public thinks it should not be difficult for Congress to act.

“Partly it’s our polarized political environment, obviously,” Toomey said. “Partly it’s because most of these issues are more complex than they appear at first blush.”

One senior House Republican blames the Senate for using an old political strategy to try to resolve too many issues at once, complicating what might be easy.

“It’s not the issue of the wall. It’s not the issue of dreamers; it’s not the issue of how you deal with those that present themselves at the border. It’s not how you deal with the family or chain piece. It’s the fact that we — Congress and especially the Senate — tries to group things into packages,” said Rep. Patrick T. McHenry (N.C.), the chief deputy Republican whip.

That is how it used to get done in Congress, cobbling together coalitions by adding some things that Democrats supported and other things Republicans wanted. “I’ll do this, if you do this. Then once you do that, you’ve gotta do this, and you’ve gotta do that,” McHenry said.

So in the Senate immigration proposals, Democrats got a path to citizenship for many of those living here under the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals order of 2012, while Republicans got border security funding and some restrictions on legal immigration.

But that philosophy, building a too-big-to-fail package, has fallen by the wayside in these hyper-political times. Each side’s political base finds something that is highly objectionable. Rather than building up the vote total, lawmakers retreat to their corners if the legislation becomes too comprehensive.

McHenry, one of the savviest vote counters in the House, said he believes that healthy majorities would support each piece of the immigration puzzle that the Senate put together — just not in one big bill.

“So why don’t we do those individual things — rather than do them as a group — why don’t we do them as individual items? I think that is the better way to approach immigration,” McHenry said.

The Senate has become such a legislative wasteland that narrow legislation is seldom considered unless it has unanimous support and gets approved by a voice vote after almost everyone has gone home for the night.

Instead, everything gets balled up together. In 2013, the Manchin-Toomey bill was not just about background checks on gun purchases. It grew into a nearly 50-page piece of legislation that included issues such as interstate sales of guns and the creation of a commission to study violence.

New normal in Congress is governing-by-deadline

Polling almost becomes irrelevant because the legislation that gets drafted to fix the important single issue ends up tackling so many issues that it is almost impossible to accurately measure public support.

Some Senate leaders are taking that lesson to heart, at least on immigration.

“I think it’s probably going to have to be something smaller,” Sen. John Cornyn (R-Tex.) said.

This was a nod to the narrower proposal offered by three Republicans — Sens. Jerry Moran (Kan.), Rob Portman (Ohio) and John Thune (S.D.) — that would provide legal status protections for dreamers and a more step-by-step approach to border funding.

McHenry noted that the Compromise of 1850 — which resolved a dispute over which territories to admit as free and slave states, ending the slave trade in Washington and other issues on the slave trade — first came to the Senate floor as a single massive package crafted by Henry Clay.

It failed. Then Stephen Douglas split it into five separate bills, each of which eventually became law and helped stave off the Civil War for another decade.

“Look at that as a reference point for immigration,” McHenry said. “How do you resolve complex issues where one issue completely taints the ability of resolving another issue?”

Read more from Paul Kane’s archive, follow him on Twitter or subscribe to his updates on Facebook.Members of The Washington Post Editorial Board appeal to President Trump and Congress to stand up to the gun lobby. It takes moral courage, they say, to back gun-control legislation and prevent mass shootings. (The Washington Post)

If you survive a mass shooting, life changes quickly. For me, at Virginia Tech almost 11 years ago, it changed the instant I heard the gunshots.

When I learned about the high school shooting in Parkland, Fla., on Wednesday, the feelings I had during and after the shooting I lived through came back immediately.

There have been hundreds of other mass shootings since that one. The physically uninjured survivors are often considered the lucky ones. And we are lucky. But that doesn’t mean that life after a shooting is easy or normal. It’s not. We have struggles and a recovery journey that can’t be seen, only felt.

Before Virginia Tech, even when a mass shooting occurred, I didn’t think much about my safety at the grocery store or at church or at a movie theater. (Then again, 11 years ago, mass shootings were less deadly.) But when a fellow student opened fire on me and my classmates, my body went into fight-or-flight mode within seconds. After hearing shots, we built a barricade to prevent the gunman from entering our classroom. Bullets went through the door, and the shooter attempted to come in, but we were able to keep him out until law enforcement arrived. At some point, the gunfire ended, but my brain kept asking: When is it safe? Are the police here yet? Is the shooter in custody? Is he dead?

[How to protect yourself during a mass shooting]

This is what’s in store now for the survivors in Florida: I remained in a fight-or-flight state for months. I kept wondering: When will it be safe again? Or, really, when will I feel safe again? I thought about safety everywhere I went. I overanalyzed which seat to choose at the movies or church, based on my best escape route. My eyes scanned everyone around me, looking for unusual behavior. My ears could hear a pin drop.

The feeling of safety I’d known my whole life was stripped away in seconds, replaced with terror, sadness, loneliness and self-doubt. Figuring out how to deal with these feelings — while regaining a sense of security, without pushing everyone and everything away — has been challenging. These days, when mass shootings happen, I write about what I went through to process my emotions. It helps me heal to know that I might be helping others heal, too.

I had a tremendous fear that it would happen again. People told me about the odds, but that wasn’t much comfort: I’d already defied them. I hear way too often: “A mass shooting won’t happen to me. Not at my school, and not in my community.” That’s what I thought, too, before it happened at Virginia Tech. The truth is that it is always somebody’s school and somebody’s community, somebody’s loved ones. And there’s no guarantee it won’t happen again.

I eventually regained a sense of public safety, but it took time and counseling.

[What do many mass shooters have in common? A history of domestic violence.]

When the news media covers a shooting, the reporting tends to focus on the numbers of people killed or hurt. Las Vegas concert: 58 killed and more than 500 injured. Sutherland Springs First Baptist Church: 26 killed and 20 injured. Rancho Tehama Elementary School: five killed and 18 injured. Marshall County High School: two killed and 18 injured. Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School: 17 killed and 15 injured. So far.

But these shootings affect more than just the families and friends who lost loved ones and the victims who were shot. I wasn’t shot, but for me, recovery didn’t start until years after the shooting. During those years, I was in denial that I needed help, because I didn’t have physical wounds or scars. This reaction is common; it feels very selfish to ask for resources when others were killed or wounded. But the truth is, we need them, too.

By now, there are thousands of physically uninjured survivors of mass shootings, as well as law enforcement officers and medics who responded to these events. These people may think for a long time that, because the media didn’t mention them, they weren’t affected. But while they may have escaped gun wounds, the mental wounds run deep. They may walk wounded for months, sometimes years, before realizing the impact the shooting had on them.

It’s a long road to recovery for everyone. When is enough enough?

CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story incorrectly stated there had been 18 school shootings this year.

Amanda Getchell grew up shooting guns but after surviving the Las Vegas massacre, she wants semi-automatic assault rifles banned. The problem, she says, is that everyone seems to have moved on. (Adriana Usero,Kate Woodsome/The Washington Post)

Read more:

I own guns. But I hate the NRA.

I’m a responsible gun owner, so I destroyed my guns

Now is exactly the right time to talk about gun politicsEleven schools since Columbine High School in 1999 have had mass shootings. Accounts by witnesses and survivors are eerily similar. (Monica Akhtar/The Washington Post)

Eleven schools since Columbine High School in 1999 have had mass shootings. Accounts by witnesses and survivors are eerily similar. (Monica Akhtar/The Washington Post)

The stunning number swept across the Internet within minutes of the news Wednesday that, yet again, another young man with another semiautomatic rifle had rampaged through a school, this time at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High in South Florida.

The figure originated with Everytown for Gun Safety, a nonprofit group, co-founded by Michael Bloomberg, that works to prevent gun violence and is most famous for its running tally of school shootings.

“This,” the organization tweeted at 4:22 p.m. Wednesday, “is the 18th school shooting in the U.S. in 2018.”

A tweet by Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) including the claim had been liked more than 45,000 times by Thursday evening, and one from political analyst Jeff Greenfield had cracked 126,000. New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio tweeted it, too, as did performers Cher and Alexander William and actors Misha Collins and Albert Brooks. News organizations — including MSNBC, ABC News, NBC News, CBS News, Time, MSN, the BBC, the New York Daily News and HuffPost — also used the number in their coverage. By Wednesday night, the top suggested search after typing “18” into Google was “18 school shootings in 2018.”

It is a horrifying statistic. And it is wrong.

Everytown has long inflated its total by including incidents of gunfire that are not really school shootings. Take, for example, what it counted as the year’s first: On the afternoon of Jan. 3, a 31-year-old man who had parked outside a Michigan elementary school called police to say he was armed and suicidal. Several hours later, he killed himself. The school, however, had been closed for seven months. There were no teachers. There were no students.

Also listed on the organization’s site is an incident from Jan. 20, when at 1 a.m. a man was shot at a sorority event on the campus of Wake Forest University. A week later, as a basketball game was being played at a Michigan high school, someone fired several rounds from a gun in the parking lot. No one was injured, and it was past 8 p.m., well after classes had ended for the day, but Everytown still labeled it a school shooting.

Everytown explains on its website that it defines a school shooting as “any time a firearm discharges a live round inside a school building or on a school campus or grounds.”

Sarah Tofte, Everytown’s research director, calls the definition “crystal clear,” noting that “every time a gun is discharged on school grounds it shatters the sense of safety” for students, parents and the community.

She said she and her colleagues work to reiterate those parameters in their public messaging. But the organization’s tweets and Facebook posts seldom include that nuance. Just once in 2018, on Feb. 2, has the organization clearly explained its definition on Twitter. And Everytown rarely pushes its jarring totals on social media immediately after the more questionable shootings, as it does with those that are high-profile and undeniable, such as the Florida massacre or one from last month in Kentucky that left two students dead and at least 18 people injured.

After The Washington Post published this report, Everytown removed the Jan. 3 suicide outside the closed Michigan school.

The figures matter because gun-control activists use them as evidence in their fight for bans on assault weapons, stricter background checks and other legislation. Gun rights groups seize on the faults in the data to undermine those arguments and, similarly, present skewed figures of their own.

1 of 69 Full Screen Autoplay Close Skip Ad × Photos from the aftermath and the scene of a shooting at a high school in Parkland, Fla. View Photos Gunfire broke out at the South Florida school shortly before students were dismissed. Caption Gunfire broke out at the South Florida school shortly before students were dismissed. Feb. 17, 2018 Resident Steve Zipper visits a makeshift memorial in Pine Trails Park in Parkland, Fla. for the victims of the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School shooting. Matt McClain/The Washington Post Buy Photo Wait 1 second to continue.

[In tiny Townville, S.C., first-graders are haunted by what they survived — and lost — on a school playground]

Gun violence is a crisis in the United States, especially for children, and a huge number — one that needs no exaggeration — have been affected by school shootings. An ongoing Washington Post analysis has found that more than 150,000 students attending at least 170 primary or secondary schools have experienced a shooting on campus since the Columbine High School massacre in 1999. That figure, which comes from a review of online archives, state and federal enrollment figures and news stories, is a conservative calculation and does not include dozens of suicides, accidents and after-school assaults that have also exposed youths to gunfire.

Just five of Everytown’s 18 school shootings listed for 2018 happened during school hours and resulted in any physical injury. Three others appeared to be intentional shootings but did not hurt anyone. Two more involved guns — one carried by a school police officer and the other by a licensed peace officer who ran a college club — that were unintentionally fired and, again, led to no injuries. At least seven of Everytown’s 18 shootings took place outside normal school hours.

Shootings of any kind, of course, can be traumatic, regardless of whether they cause physical harm.

A month ago, for example, a group of college students were at a meeting of a criminal-justice club in Texas when a student accidentally fired a real gun, rather than a training weapon. The bullet went through a wall, then a window. Though no one was hurt, it left the student distraught.

Is that a school shooting, though? Yes, Everytown says.

“Since 2013,” the organization says on its website, “there have been nearly 300 school shootings in America — an average of about one a week.”

But since Everytown began its tracking, it has included these dubious examples — in August 2013, a man shot on a Tennessee high school’s property at 2 a.m.; in December 2014, a man shot in his car late one night and discovered the next day in a Pennsylvania elementary school’s parking lot; in August 2015, a man who climbed atop the roof of an empty Texas school on a Sunday morning and fired sporadically; in January 2016, a man in an Indiana high school parking lot whose gun accidentally went off in his glove box, before any students had arrived on campus; in December 2017, two teens in Washington state who shot up a high school just before midnight on New Year’s Eve, when the building was otherwise empty.

In 2015, The Post’s Fact Checker awarded the group’s figures — invoked by Sen. Chris Murphy (D-Conn.) — four Pinocchios for misleading methodology.

Another database, the Gun Violence Archive, defines school shootings in much narrower terms, considering only those that take place during school hours or extracurricular activities.

Yet many journalists rely on Everytown’s data. Post media critic Erik Wemple included the 18 figure in a column Wednesday night, and Michael Barbaro, host of the New York Times’ podcast “The Daily,” used the number to punctuate the end of his Thursday show.

[The terrible numbers that grow with each mass shooting]

Much like trying to define a mass shooting, deciding what is and is not a school shooting can be difficult. Some obviously fit the common-sense definition: Last month, a teen in Texas opened fire in a school cafeteria, injuring a 15-year-old girl.

Others that Everytown includes on its list, though, are trickier to categorize.

About 6 p.m. Jan. 10, a bullet probably fired from off campus hit the window of a building at a college in Southern California. No one was hurt, but students could still have been frightened. Classes were canceled, rooms were locked down and police searched campus for the gunman, who was never found.

On Feb. 5, a police officer was sitting on a bench in a Minnesota school gym when a third-grader accidentally pulled the trigger of his holstered pistol, firing a round into the floor. None of the four students in the gym were injured, but, again, the incident was probably scary.

What is not in dispute is gun violence’s pervasiveness and its devastating impact on children. A recent study of World Health Organization data published in the American Journal of Medicine that found that, among high-income nations, 91 percent of children younger than 15 who were killed by bullets lived in the United States.

And the trends are only growing more dire.

On average, two dozen children are shot every day in the United States, and in 2016 more youths were killed by gunfire — 1,637 — than during any previous year this millennium.Schools are tightening security and reviewing safety measures after the mass shooting at a Florida high school on Wednesday. (iStock) (iStock/iStock)

Schools across the Washington region tightened security and reviewed safety measures in the aftermath of a mass shooting at a Florida high school, even as two Maryland school systems fielded threats of violence.

In Montgomery County, parents arrived by the dozens Friday to pick up students from Northwest High School after the principal messaged families that police were investigating an online threat.

“At this time the police do not have any credible information to support the validity of this threat,” principal Jimmy D’Andrea wrote early Friday.

Even so, parents descended in short order. By 11 a.m., 650 parents had collected their children from the Germantown school.

“For a lot of people, it seemed like it had the potential of imminently happening here,” said Susan Burkinshaw, who has a daughter at Northwest and recalled a flurry of text messages and Facebook posts among parents.

School systems across the country scrambled to handle similar threats and to scrutinize safeguards as the nation reeled from the horror at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, where 17 people were killed in one of the nation’s deadliest school shootings.

A school district south of Nashville decided to cancel classes for students Monday so that employees can spend the day focused on security. All schools have safety plans, but the goal is to come together, provide a refresher, “go back to the basics” and possibly air a few ideas, said Carol Birdsong, spokeswoman for the Williamson County Schools.

“I apologize for the short notice but feel that such an action is required,” Mike Looney, the Williamson superintendent, said in a tweet.

[Copycat threats and rumors of ‘Florida pt 2’ put schools on high alert after shooting rampage]

In the Washington area, school systems sought to reassure students, parents and teachers that campuses are safe. Many high schools have security personnel and at least one campus police officer, known as a school resource officer.

In Montgomery County, Police Capt. Paul Starks noted the Northwest High incident was one of 10 to 12 threats involving county schools since Wednesday. Some were easily debunked, he said, while others proved more complex to investigate. They showed up in text messages, social media posts or verbal expressions, he said.

Starks emphasized the importance of reporting potential problems expeditiously and warned against students making false posts, urging parents to talk to their children. “There are real consequences to posting this stuff and making these threats,” he said.

Police arrested a 15-year-old student Friday in connection with the threat against Northwest, charging him with offenses relating to disrupting school operations.

The incident at Northwest came a day after Montgomery police arrested a teenager who allegedly stowed a loaded 9mm Glock handgun in his bookbag and brought it to Clarksburg High.

Montgomery County Schools Superintendent Jack Smith posted a message to families outlining safety measures, including emergency-preparedness drills, surveillance cameras, security staffing and access-control systems in schools.

The school system has been doing a school-by-school analysis of security since last spring, when concerns were raised by an alleged rape at a Rockville high school.

[Security review to be launched in wake of Rockville High School rape case]

“People are really anxious and want to know what we can do to keep their kids safe,” Montgomery County school spokesman Derek Turner said. Schools received some mistaken reports of threats, he said, but “people are doing the right thing: See something, say something.”

In Prince George’s County, two middle schools received threats in the days after Wednesday’s shooting in Florida. One came through Snapchat, leading to the arrest of a middle school student Friday, said schools spokesman John White. The second involved a student at another school, who made a verbal threat Friday and was disciplined.

School leaders in Prince George’s will analyze security practices and discuss what can be learned from recent events, White said.

In a message to families Friday, district leaders described their efforts to keep schools safe and encouraged parents to monitor students’ social media usage and speak with children about any troubling behavior they have observed.

[Student arrested after bringing loaded gun to Maryland high school]

In Fairfax County, heightened security wasn’t in response to a specific threat made in the Northern Virginia school system but was done to ease anxiety, according to a message from district officials.

“This step is being taken out of an abundance of caution, and to provide reassurance to students, staff and the community after the events that occurred in Florida,” the district said in the message.

Security was increased at campuses, according to the message. Fairfax County police ordered officers to patrol closer to schools — a common response following school shootings or other national events, said Emilie Voss, spokeswoman with the Fairfax police department.

Frederick Amico, the principal at Fairfax’s Langley High School, issued a statement offering reassurance.

“In light of recent events, I have received numerous inquiries regarding the security of our students,” he said. “I want to assure everyone in our community that the safety and security of our students is our number one priority.”

School officials in Arlington County reminded students to share concerns if they see or hear anything that troubles them, spokesman Frank Bellavia said. Schools sent messages to families reiterating security procedures the district has in place.

Loudoun County schools are working to ensure safety protocols are followed by reemphasizing measures such as keeping doors locked and identifying visitors before allowing them to enter schools, spokesman Wayde Byard said.

Broward County Sheriff Scott Israel speaks at a news conference near Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., on Thursday. At right is Florida Gov. Rick Scott (R). (Giorgio Viera/EPA-EFE/Shutterstock)

On Wednesday evening, as the country picked through the wreckage of another mass shooting, Broward County Sheriff Scott Israel, flanked by a Republican governor with an “A” rating from the National Rifle Association, made a pitch for gun control.

“I’ve said this time and time again,” Israel began. “While the people who are victims of mental health illnesses in this country are being treated, in the opinion of this sheriff, they should not be able to buy, surround themselves with, purchase or carry a handgun. Those two things don’t mix.”

As mild as the proposal sounded, coming from a top law enforcement figure in one of the country’s most gun-friendly states, the comments put Israel outside the norm. But this was not Israel’s first time in the national spotlight after random violence. Nor was it the first time the sheriff had ventured into the stormy waters of the national gun debate.

In January 2017, a gunman opened fire at the Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport, killing five and wounding 35 others. It was a crime that brushed against Israel’s own family — his sister-in-law was at the airport during the attack. Afterward, the Broward sheriff publicly spoke about sensible gun policy as a tool to prevent mass violence.

After Wednesday’s rampage at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, the school that Israel’s own triplets once attended, the sheriff promised again to be a vocal advocate on solutions for gun violence.

“I’m going to be very animated about what I think this country can do to possibly prevent these tragedies in the future,” the sheriff said Thursday morning at a news conference.

Israel can afford to be an outspoken voice on the national stage, because he safely sits on a high perch in South Florida. In Broward, Florida’s second largest county, politics are entwined with the top law enforcement job. The county is a balkanized stitch of small municipalities, and the sheriff is arguably the area’s most powerful elected countywide official.

Not only does the Broward County sheriff run the largest fully accredited sheriff’s office in the country, with nearly 6,000 employees and an annual budget of $730 million, but the position also has tremendous political sway — plus a colorful history of dirty politics, big personalities and corruption.

Television viewers can thank a past Broward sheriff for “Cops,” the television show. Another sheriff, who held the office for a decade, resigned in 2007 after pleading guilty to tax evasion and mail fraud charges. The last two contested sheriff elections featured the campaign shenanigans of Roger Stone, the notorious Republican political operative. In 2008, then-Broward Sheriff Al Lamberti used Stone to fend off a challenge by a small-town police chief — Scott Israel, the Sun-Sentinel reported.

When Israel ran again against Lamberti in 2012, Stone switched teams to lead the charge against the incumbent. Israel won.

Israel comes to law enforcement through his family. He was raised in New York City, where his father was a homicide detective with the New York Police Department, the Miami Herald reported in a 2017 profile. On a visit to Florida in 1979, Israel on a whim filed out an application with the Fort Lauderdale Police Department. By the mid-1980s he was working as a narcotics detective.

Broward was in the midst of the crack era, with the drug surging through the county, thanks to a pipeline of cocaine hitting South Florida from South America.

Law enforcement in the area met the mandate of the drug war with creative zest, particularly Israel’s precursor at the time, Broward Sheriff Nick Navarro. Under the sheriff’s orders, the office manufactured its own crack cocaine for officers who posed as dealers and then arrested buyers, a practice that was controversial even within law enforcement circles.

“I never heard of that in my life before,” a Drug Enforcement Administration official told the Sun-Sentinel in 1989. Navarro — who also made international headlines when he brought obscenity charges against hip-hop legends 2 Live Crew — doubled down on the publicity his department’s aggressive tactics attracted in 1988, when he invited camera crews to follow his deputies. The footage became “Cops.”

The Fort Lauderdale police department made its own contribution to drug war lore in 1985, when the department formed an aggressive special unit called the Raiders to go after drug pushers. The team was effective — and feared — in the city’s predominantly black northwest corner, sparking complaints of excessive force and unfair treatment. Residents of the same area still refer to police as raiders, a lingering relic of the drug war’s impact. According to the Sun-Sentinel, Israel served on the squad.

Israel rose through the ranks, eventually heading the SWAT team, before leaving in 2004 to take over as police chief of a nearby town. In 2007, Israel switched his party affiliation to Democrat to run for county sheriff. After winning a primary, he faced incumbent Lamberti and felt the brunt of Roger Stone’s personal attacks. The political operative told the Sun-Sentinel that Israel was “an unqualified punk, a racist and a thief.”

According to Stone, he later became disillusioned with Lamberti after the sheriff’s office was implicated in a scandal involving a local Ponzi scammer named Scott Rothstein.

“I realized I had done a great injustice to Scott Israel,” Stone said. “I sought him out and persuaded him to run again. I handled his second campaign pro bono — taking not a dime.”

In 2012, Israel expressed no qualms about his adviser’s tactics, which included a pro-Israel news website called the Broward Bugle. “I’m a cop. I’m not a politician,” Israel said at the time. “I leave the tactics to the pros. Roger Stone wouldn’t tell me how to direct the SWAT team . . . and I wouldn’t tell him how to consult on campaigns.”

After his election, Israel put three Stone associates on the sheriff’s office payroll — a move that caused concern among critics. Others inside the courthouse were worried about having a veteran of the drug war’s high season in the county’s top law enforcement seat. “I felt great trepidation when Scott was elected because I knew where he came from and what law enforcement was about in the ’70s and ’80s,” Howard Finkelstein, the Broward public defender, told the Miami Herald last year.

Those concerns were not shared by the majority of county voters. Israel has received high marks for his work in the county, and he easily won reelection in 2016.

In office, he has been particularly outspoken about gun policy. In 2013, the Florida Sheriffs Association released a statement supporting the state’s stand-your-ground law following the 2012 shooting of Trayvon Martin. Israel, however, broke from his fellow law enforcers, advocating for a narrower version of the law.

“The stand-your-ground law effectively tied the hands of the law enforcement investigation in George Zimmerman’s fatal shooting of 17-year-old Trayvon Martin — and it will continue to do so until this law is fixed,” he wrote in a commentary for the Sun-Sentinel.

Israel has been equally vocal about other control measures, particularly with individuals suffering from mental disabilities.

“How many more innocent lives must perish before our legislators pass meaningful and common sense gun legislation?” he wrote in 2017. “How many more tragic attacks like those at Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport, Sandy Hook Elementary and the Pulse nightclub need to occur before rational thought prevails?”

This post has been updated.

More from Morning Mix:

They shared their lives on YouTube. Then an obsessed fan came calling — with a gun.

Yet another makeshift memorial after yet another mass shooting. (Rhona Wise/AFP/Getty Images)

Remove the captions from the photos and put the images in front of anyone in the United States, and they will know instantly what they are looking at.

The police cruisers and yellow tape tell you it is a crime scene; other details are the tip-off that it is a uniquely American kind. Often, there will be photographs or footage captured from above, a cue that some terrible event has spurred producers to scramble their live news helicopter crews. We will see a building in the frame, at first eerily still. Then pours forth a line of shaken workers or moviegoers or shoppers or small children, marched single-file, hands held high or on the shoulders of the person in front of them, scared to death but at this moment focused on showing they are not the gunman who has just opened fire inside.

Such a scene is particularly familiar to us: We work for a nonprofit news organization that should not need to exist, one whose sole job is to report on guns and gun violence in the United States. Early on — around the seventh of the 25 major active shooter incidents that our site, the Trace, has covered during its two and a half years in operation — it struck us that the events have an almost formal visual language. “Mass shootings are a public health epidemic whose ubiquity has begun to produce its own aesthetic” is how the writer Alice Gregory put it, in an essay we published after a husband and wife armed like paramilitaries murdered 14 people at an office holiday party in San Bernardino, Calif., in December 2015.

You can go back 30 years and find examples of the genre that, but for the clothes and the hairstyles, could have been taken this week. There is a photo from the aftermath of the January 1989 massacre in Stockton, Calif., where a man wielding an AK-47 sprayed at least 107 rounds on the children and teachers assembled on an elementary school playground. The image could be from Jonesboro, Ark., in March 1998, or Marysville, Wash., in October 2014, or Marshall County, Kentucky, last month. Or from Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., on Wednesday. The scene is the same: Mothers and fathers hug — clutch — children who had been feared hurt or dead.

The lockdown lifts. Dusk falls. Photographers snap candids of sobbing pairs and contemplative witnesses standing alone.

There are flickering candles at nighttime vigils.

There are hands locked in resolute prayer circles.

The genre expands to fit the times; the newest entry is the shot of the cellphone screen showing text messages that could have been (or were) final words. It is the familiarity of it all, the creeping normalcy, the expectedness, that has led the FBI’s former resident expert on the subject to conclude that America “has absolutely become numb to these shootings,” the tiny sliver of our country’s much larger gun violence problem that once seemed to break through but no longer does. As the cycle takes hold again, we hear or read the harrowing experience of yet another survivor, yet another bystander. We watch as nothing seems to change, again. Both lose the power to shock.

[Why I walked out of the House’s empty moment of silence for gun victims]

But numb is not quite right. People on both sides of the gun issue are deeply saddened by this latest mass shooting. Some gun owners are also angry to feel blamed and more fiercely protective than ever of the guns they have been convinced could be taken away. Advocates of stricter gun laws are angry that the narrow agenda of the National Rifle Association may again overwhelm the common ground they have found on the issue with their co-workers, fellow congregants, and friends.

Instead of inured, maybe people are just exhausted. They are worn out and worn down by mass shootings that have by some measures become more frequent and have indisputably become more deadly, with five of the 10 worst in modern U.S. history occurring during the past 26 months.

If the school shooting in Parkland produces a different outcome, it will be because of the way the teenagers who lived through it enabled the rest of us to get closer to what they endured. The spree that left 17 people dead and another 14 injured brought with it the usual progression of images and news accounts. But on their social media accounts, the Florida students also created a separate record, unmediated and unsanitized by journalism’s conventions.

THERE ARE GUNSHOTS — Gen #NeverAgain (@genthemartian) February 14, 2018

I am in a school shooting right now… — Aidan Minoff (@TheCaptainAidan) February 14, 2018

oh my god we’re in a closet i can’t believe this is happening — Gen #NeverAgain (@genthemartian) February 14, 2018

Never been more scared ever in my life. I hope everyone that’s in my school and around my school is okay. — G (@gabbyjfigueroa) February 14, 2018

THE SWAT EVACUATED US AND LIKE 3 PEOPLE I KNOW WERE SHOT IN OUR BUILDING AND THERE WAS BLOOD EVERYWHERE I CANT BREATH RIGHT NOW BUT IM SAFE — heather (@bitchstille) February 14, 2018

I JUST WANT TO KNOW IF EVERYONE IS SAFE CAUSE IM SHAKING THERE WAS LIKE PEOPLE IVE SEEN BEFORE JUST DEAD IN THE HALLS I CANT CALM DOWN AT ALL THIS WAS THE MOST TERRYFYING THIS IVE EVER SEEN — heather (@bitchstille) February 14, 2018

After the Columbine school shooting, a grainy, soundless security camera recording emerged showing the killers stalking the cafeteria. It is chilling viewing. But from Stoneman Douglas, we got high-resolution videos with vivid audio that will steal your breath, and then your sleep.

[I’m a Broward County teacher. Thoughts and prayers won’t keep my students safe.]

The videos linked below are graphic and disturbing. Blood and victims are briefly visible in some. They may be most terrifying for what you hear.

On Snapchat, a student cowering with classmates under their desks records as the gunman, unseen, lets off more than a dozen deafening shots from the hallway or the next classroom over. The sound of those blasts stays with you. The screams of the children, even more so. They are in terrible danger. It is way too close.

A separate, minute-long video pans a classroom as police officers wearing purple medical gloves carry away a student who appears to have been injured. Motionless legs splay out from behind a lectern. The camera rocks as wailing students, some shoeless, are led into the hallway. They pass broken glass and backpacks flung in panic and at least one body. Their bawling grows louder as they reach the door and exit under the impossible blue sky of a South Florida afternoon.

Another student captured the moment SWAT team members came to his classroom to take them to safety. Officers in riot gear enter, flashlights shining, gun barrels pointing and ask the teenagers to show their hands. Arms shoot up. Someone whimpers. You watch as one pair of hands shakes uncontrollably, as if they may never stop.

In the hours afterward, the rote choreography will resume. Politicians will tweet thoughts and prayers. The president of the United States will talk about mental illness and avoid mention of firearms or gun laws. He will hint at warning signs missed, tweeting that students who attended Stoneman Douglas with the alleged gunman “knew he was a big problem” in a way that seems to imply they should have done more to prevent the slaughter.

Some of those students will not be having any of it.

One boy, a senior who recorded his own footage of his rattled classmates, was interviewed on cable news the day after the shooting. “We’re children,” he says. “You guys, like, are the adults. You need to take some action. And play a role: work together, come over your politics, and get something done.”

Read more:

I survived a mass shooting. My life was never the same afterward.

How to protect yourself during a mass shooting

These are the threats you get when you lead a gun control groupAudience members, from left, Tim Lettie, Barbara Kinsey and Carter Lloyd at the Virginia 10th House District forum at James Wood Middle School in Winchester, Va., Saturday Feb. 17, 2018 (Dayna Smith/For the Washington Post)

Tighten gun laws. Reform campaign finance laws. Increase the minimum wage.

Seven of the Democrats running to unseat Rep. Barbara Comstock (R-Va.) agreed on nearly every issue lobbed at them Saturday in the first major forum of the primary, except one: how to beat the congresswoman.

“Barbara Comstock often talks like us and always votes like them,” said Alison Friedman, a former anti-human trafficking official at the State Department.

“I’m ready to paint a stark contrast with her,” said Army veteran Dan Helmer.

“The way to beat her is to steal her voters,” said Deep Sran, an educator who believes minority voters and small-business owners are the key to winning the district.

Candidates demonstrate their solidarity at the conclusion of the Virginia 10th House District forum at James Wood Middle School in Winchester, Va. (Dayna Smith/For the Washington Post)

They were joined onstage by scientist Julia Biggins, former Obama administration official Lindsey Davis Stover, former federal prosecutor Paul Pelletier and state Sen. Jennifer Wexton (Loudoun), the only elected official in the group. (A physician, Shadi Ayyas, is also running but filed too late to participate in the forum.)

An audience of more than 200 people hooted most for take-downs of President Trump and his administration as snow fell outside James Wood Middle School in Frederick County.

The conservative county full of Comstock voters surrounds a spot of blue in Winchester, a city where activists energized by Trump’s election and the Women’s March formed an Indivisible group that helped organize the forum.

A huge inflatable bird stood outside the auditorium next to a sign heralding “Congresswoman Comstock Chicken” from the activist group Dump Comstock.

Harnessing the enthusiasm that fueled Gov. Ralph Northam’s nine-point win and nearly flipped the balance of power in the House of Delegates in 2017, is the challenge facing Democrats vying for the party nomination.

Days after the deadly school shooting in Parkland, Fla., the candidates echoed each others’ calls to expand background checks, ban assault weapons and block people on the no-fly list from having guns.

Wexton, who is in the middle of the legislative session in Richmond, said gun violence will not sway Republicans in Congress or the General Assembly.

“We’re not going to change their minds on this issue,” Wexton said, “we need to change their seats. . . . We need to stay angry, we need to stay outraged. Children are dying, they’re being murdered just for going to school in the morning.”

Laws can’t stop all shootings, but, she asked, don’t they want to stop some? “Yes!” several people called out from the audience.

Stover said that of House members who received donations from the NRA, Comstock is in the top 10 — which, Friedman said, puts Comstock in the pocket of special interests.

Friedman’s mother has a gun in her home in rural Oklahoma. “But that right is not in conflict with my ability to send my daughter to public school and know that she’s safe,” she said.

Biggins called for the repeal of the “ Dickey amendment,” which prevents the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention from performing gun violence research.

The candidates’ answers highlighted a dilemma faced by Democrats: energize enough party loyalists to break out of the crowded primary without losing moderate and independent voters in the general election.

“What we heard is Democrats playing to the far left base,” said Garren Shipley, a spokesman for the National Republican Committee in Virginia, who attended the forum.

For example, Helmer’s military service may appeal to conservative parts of the district, but he also called for Trump’s impeachment and Medicaid for all.

He said he has seen first hand the consequences of unwise military action: “It’s inscribed on the headstones of dear friends.”

A quip from Pelletier fell flat among activists working to turn out young voters.

“Way back in the ’80s before some of you up here were born . . .” he began one answer.

Shipley noted the lack of time devoted to issues specific to the 10th District, which includes all of Loudoun County and parts of Prince William and Fairfax counties, as well as rural counties on the West Virginia border.

[After Virginia blowout, Comstock’s road to reelection grows steeper]

Sran acknowledged Comstock’s relentless courting of minority groups in the district. His family came to the United States from India before he was born in Maryland.

“Never in my life in Montgomery County, Maryland, did I worry about them,” he said, referring to Trump’s travel ban on immigrants from majority-Muslim countries. “For 46 years. Now when I see a Muslim family, a Sikh family, a Hindu family, for the first time in my life I worry about them.”

The way to fix that, he said, is to elect candidates who reflect the nation as a whole.

Candidates repeatedly invoked Trump and tried to tie Comstock to him, but in her last reelection race, the congresswoman’s steady focus on local issues, from transportation to MS-13 gang violence, helped her win.

Near the end of the 1½ -hour forum, Stover was the first candidate to mention Metro funding, which Comstock has tried to address through legislation.

Each of the seven Democrats on stage pledged to support the winner of the primary, a bid for unity in the mold of Tom Perriello, who lost to Northam last year but immediately endorsed him.

“We need to get our swagger back,” Sran said, rallying the crowd. “We have the truth on our side. . . . There are no Roy Moores and Donald Trumps anywhere. We’re just better.”



The primary is June 12.

Bradley Beal scored 15 points in the first round, failing to find a groove until late. (AP Photo/Chris Pizzello)

LOS ANGELES — Bradley Beal couldn’t miss in his closed practice shooting sessions. However, when the Washington Wizards guard hit the Staples Center stage Saturday night for the Three-Point Shootout, Beal’s touch deserted him in the spotlight.

Beal finished with 15 points in the first round, not enough to advance to the top three. Phoenix Suns guard Devin Booker won the contest, sizzling with an all-time high of 28 to defeat Golden State’s Klay Thompson, a former champion in the event.

Beal felt his work before the shootout might have played a role in his performance.

“I might have over-prepared myself,” Beal said. “I came in and put a little too much pressure on myself, but it was fun. I got a good experience. It’s definitely different when it’s showtime. I will say that. It’s totally different.”

[Jazz rookie Donovan Mitchell delights in a nostalgic NBA Slam Dunk Contest win]

A slow start doomed Beal. But by the time he reached the fourth rack, stacked with money balls counting for two points, he had found his rhythm. Beal knocked down four of five shots, but the sweet shooting stroke arrived too late.

In 2014, Beal came up just short in the final round and thought this time would be different. It was — but only as it related to his nerves.

“I feel like I was a little more nervous this time,” Beal said. “I feel like I was a lot stronger, clanking off the glass. Oh, man. It was just downhill from there. But it was fun. It was a great experience.”

At least Beal had a better showing than Oklahoma City’s Paul George, who finished with nine.

“Hey, I got in double digits, man,” Beal said.

Although Beal’s Saturday night did not go as planned, he still has the main event. On Sunday, Beal will make his first appearance as an all-star as a reserve selected by LeBron James.

Read more on the NBA:

Adam Silver talks playoff reseeding, one-and-dones and more at NBA All-Star Weekend

LeBron James won’t shut up and dribble: ‘I’ve defeated the odds, and I want every kid to know that’

Charles Barkley and ‘NBA on TNT’ crew rip Laura Ingraham and Fox News

‘I’m taking on all challenges’: John Wall talks rehab, relationship with Marcin Gortat

Joel Embiid is already an all-star starter. His next goal: Becoming the NBA’s best player.A Florida prosecutor hinted Saturday that his office would seek the death penalty for the confessed teen killer who massacred 17 people in a high school on Valentine’s Day.

“This certainly is the type of case the death penalty was designed for,” Broward County State Attorney Mike Satz said in a statement. “This was a highly calculated and premeditated murder of 17 people and the attempted murder of everyone in that school. Our office will announce our formal position at the appropriate time.”

Satz gave no indication of when his office planned to make a decision.

“Now is the time to let the families grieve and bury their children and loved ones,” he said.

Satz’s statement comes a day after Broward Public Defender Howard Finkelstein said Nikolas Cruz, 19, would plead guilty in exchange for nixing the death penalty option.

With WiresConfessed Florida school shooter Nikolas Cruz would throw chairs, a dog bowl, a drinking glass — seemingly anything he could get his hands on — during violent assaults on his adopted mother, according to details of the more than 30 police incident reports revealed Saturday.

Once, the teen even hit his mom, Lynda Cruz, with a vacuum cleaner hose, and cruelly called her “a useless bitch’ according to the reports, obtained by CNN.

Cops were called to the home most recently in September 2016, months before the the mom, Cruz, and his little brother moved from the quiet, prosperous neighborhood of Parkland, Broward County.

One report in particular, from January 15, 2013, stands out for showing the then-14-year-old’s volatile temper.

The mom told cops that when Cruz refused to go to school that day,l she took away his Xbox “privileges,” hiding the game system away in her vehicle.

Enraged, Cruz “retaliated and threw a chair, dog bowl and a drinking glass across the room,” she told cops, according to the report.

Nikolas called her “a useless bitch,” along with other profanities she declined to share with the police.

During that visit, the mom also told cops that Nikolas had a “history of developmental and learning disabilities,” including Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, and was “increasingly irate.”

Nikolas was cuffed and seated in the back of a police car as the cops interviewed his mom, CNN reported.

A counselor from the nearby behavioral health facility where Cruz had been a client for years showed up and “gave Nikolas his prescribed medication,” the report said, after which the boy “began to calm down and cooperated.”

Four days after Cruz’s 18th birthday, Lynda called the Broward County Sheriff’s deputies because they’d been fighting over the paperwork Cruz needed to get a Florida State identification card.

The mother was worried, she said then, because he’d mentioned wanting to get a gun — and had started “cutting his arms … to get attention.”

The long and frequent history of police reports was just another warning sign of a teen on the downslope to a deadly rampage.

Other neighbors have described him abusing animals, including setting his family’s dog on another neighbor’s piglets, or shooting at their chickens with a B.B. or pellet gun, according to the Miami Herald.

Lynda Cruz died in November from complications from the flu.The AR-15 — the assault rifle used in last week’s Florida school shooting massacre — remained a weapon of choice at a Saturday gun show held in Hollywood, Fla. on Saturday — less than an hour’s drive from the slaughter.

“What would not selling [the gun] have done?” dealer Will McDough asked of the AR-15 used to murder 17 people in Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, FL.

“If he had a knife would you regulate the knife — or the person standing behind it?” asked McDough, one of more than a dozen dealers selling the model.

Nikolas Cruz, 19, had legally purchased his AR-15 from a licensed dealer upon turning 18, officials have said.

“I don’t believe that any law that they would have added would have deterred what happened,” said shopper Joe Arrington, 29. “I think a lot of agencies didn’t do their job.”Thousands of people — including students who survived a deranged killer’s rampage in their high school — demanded stricter gun control laws Saturday in Florida, as they blasted the politicians who they said merely pay lip service to their grief.

“We need to pay attention to the fact that this isn’t just a mental health issue,” said Emma Gonzalez, an 18-year-old student at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, where 17 people were gunned down Wednesday by confessed shooter Nikolas Cruz.

“Every single person up here today — all these people should be at home grieving — but instead we are up here standing together, because if all our government and president can do is send thoughts and prayers, then it is time for victims to be the change we need to see,” she continued, CBS News reported.

Gonzalez was among the throng at the gun control rally outside the federal courthouse in Fort Lauderdale who rejected comments made by President Trump, who suggested last week that mental illness was the main reason Cruz went on his rampage.

The shooter, “wouldn’t have harmed that many students with a knife!” said, Gonzalez, who challenged politicians to stop taking donations from the National Rifle Association.

“They say a good guy with a gun stops a bad guy with a gun,” she said, and the crowd chanted, “We call BS!”

And she said adults who knew Cruz had a history of mental issues should have done more to prevent him from buying guns.

“Because of these gun laws, people that I know, people that I love, have died, and I will never be able to see them again,” said Delaney Tarr, a Marjory Stoneman Douglas student.

Florida Sen. Gary Farmer, (D-Fort Lauderdale) urged “sensible gun safety laws.”

“This is the result of the stranglehold that the NRA has over Tallahassee and Washington DC and too many legislators,” he said.

With Post WiresThe younger brother of deranged school shooter Nikolas Cruz was committed to a mental health facility, according to reports.

Authorities removed someone Friday from the home of Rocxanne Deschamps, a longtime family friend of the Cruz brothers who took them in after their adoptive mother died of pneumonia in November, The Palm Beach Post reported.

A friend of Deschamps confirmed Zachary Cruz, who turns 18 next week, was the person removed from the home.

The younger Cruz brother was involuntarily committed under Florida’s Baker Act, under which he can be held involuntarily for up to 12 hours for an involuntary psychiatric exam. It’s unclear if he’s been released.

Nikolas Cruz left Deschamps’ Lantana, FL mobile home around Thanksgiving after he and Deschamps squared off over a gun.

“He bought a gun and wanted to bring it into my house,” she said in comments that have since been wiped from her Facebook page, the paper reported.

Chad Bennett, a family friend, said Deschamps gave Cruz an ultimatum and Cruz “chose the gun and he left.” He moved in with family in northern Broward county, a Cruz family lawyer told the newspaper.

The Palm Beach Post said it was not known if the gun Cruz brought to the Deschamps home was the AR-15 semi-automatic rifle Cruz used to kill 17 people in Wednesday’s mass shooting at Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, FL.The front-page Post editorial got a lot of notice . . . and led to passage of a tough new gun law.

No, we’re not talking about Friday’s editorial calling on President Trump to act in the wake of the Parkland, Fla., school massacre — but about our Feb. 13, 1980, Page One column, “Enough is enough.”

The Post has spent four decades pushing to rid our streets of danger.

Yes, we’ve long been dubious of those who would basically repeal the Second Amendment, in hopes that some magical enforcement panacea can end all gun violence.

But we’ve also consistently backed practical measures to make a difference — as in our 1980 campaign, which within four months led to America’s toughest gun-control law.

Back then, the NYPD reckoned the city held 2 million illegal handguns. The murder rate had risen to its highest levels ever (but had not yet reached its peak).

And judges were proving reluctant to impose tough sentences on those convicted of gun crimes: Of 9,518 arrests for possessing illegal guns, only 750 actually served prison time.

So when two police officers were shot to death in just 14 days, The Post — in a front-page editorial, followed by many more — angrily declared, “Enough is enough.”

Our focus wasn’t just on cops: “How many more of our people must die violent deaths at the whim of mindless assailants with guns?” we asked.

We sent reporters to other states to show how simple it was to buy guns and quickly bring them back unimpeded.

And we called out those who had long beaten back any hint of gun control: “Time and again the gun lobby, in alliance with upstate leaders of the GOP-ruled State Senate, has successfully sabotaged efforts to achieve passage of gun laws that would send a meaningful message.”

Our demands then: mandatory minimum sentences for anyone caught with an illegal gun; stiff penalties for unlawful gun sales; harsher punishment for those committing gun crimes and rigorous standards for the issuing of licenses for self-defense.

Ordinary New Yorkers responded, flooding state lawmakers with demands for action. One by one, top legislative leaders jumped on board the bandwagon.

Just four months later, then-Gov. Hugh Carey signed a bill that, while not as strong as we wanted, was tougher than that of any other state. And it was the first-ever defeat for the “invincible” handgun lobby.

But as we noted then, this was merely one battle in what would likely be a long war. Violent crime continued to soar.

By the early ’90s, The Post was demanding more action. With crime at record levels, we wholeheartedly endorsed the aggressive, proactive policing policies of Mayor Rudy Giuliani and his first police commissioner, Bill Bratton.

Just as we’d stood up to conservatives in 1980, this time we battled liberals who opposed Broken Windows policing — which stops more serious crimes by getting thugs off the street while they’re committing “minor,” quality-of-life crimes.

It also got illegal guns off the street. Which is why we believe there’s still a place for pro-active policing, even as self-styled “reformers” keep attacking it.

Such policies have made New York the safest big city in the nation, with crime at record-low levels unimaginable during the “Enough is enough” campaign.

Now the debate isn’t over handgun-driven street crime, which remains low in most of the nation, but over mass attacks committed with rifles.

Again, we don’t believe some single miracle is “sure” to prevent all such massacres. There are a lot of necessary factors, including stricter background checks and mental-health screening.

And we understand that the vast majority of long-gun owners are entirely law-abiding, with legitimate Second Amendment rights.

But as we noted Friday, there is also a need for sensible gun control that, without unduly infringing on those rights, can at least slow the tide and limit the toll of these horrors.

That’s why we called for reinstating the federal assault-weapon ban, raising the age to buy all firearms, banning gun sales to all criminal fugitives and targeting bump stocks.

As well as for driving a stake through the heart of the proposed Concealed Carry Reciprocity Act — which would undo the New York law we pushed for 38 years ago.

Our aim, as we said Friday, has been “to make it harder for those who shouldn’t have firearms to get them” and “to send a message that the nation is cracking down.”

But that’s the same goal we were advocating on this page back when Jimmy Carter was president.Parents terrified by the deadly school shooting in South Florida are spending big bucks on bulletproof backpacks for their kids, according to reports.

Massachusetts-based Bullet Blocker — which sells the fortified bags for between $200 to $500 — has seen a 30 percent surge in sales since Wednesday’s massacre in Parkland, according to TMZ.

The company sold 500 of the backpacks on Thursday alone, owner Joe Curran told the news outlet, adding that the majority were headed to Florida.

The backpacks, which weigh about 4 1/2 pounds, are lined with Kevlar, a fiber used in bulletproof vests that are used by law enforcement.

Bullet Blocker describes Curran on its website as “a real-life father who wanted to do all that he could to protect his two school-aged children after witnessing the horror of the Virginia Tech massacre.”

The former US Army Ranger, sheriff’s deputy and firearms instructor invented “My Child’s Pack,” the first bulletproof backpack designed for students, according to the company.

One of the backpacks listed on the site is the $330 BulletBlocker NIJ IIIA, which is available in three colors and contains an anti-ballistic panel weighing about 20 ounces.

Bullet Blocker says it’s capable of stopping .357 and .44 Magnum rounds, 9 mm bullets and .45-caliber hollow-point ammo and more.

The company also caters to deep-pocketed adult customers with a range of luxury bulletproof items — including a $3,100 Gucci diaper bag, a $3,200 Gucci jacket, a $5,225 Hermes bag and a $5,895 Armani suit.

Meanwhile, another company’s bulletproof backpacks were put to the test at a Florida shooting range, where a .40-caliber handgun, 9 mm pistol and a 12-gauge shotgun were fired at them.

The armor stopped the handgun rounds and shotgun pellets from completely penetrating the backpacks made by Guard Dog Security, according to WFTV.

But the backpacks – even with added textbooks – were unable to stop a full-metal jacket bullet fired from an AR-15, the kind of assault weapon used in this week’s bloodbath.

Yasir Sheikh, president of Guard Dog Security, said his company wasn’t preying on parents’ fears.

“It’s not as foreign anymore,” Sheikh told WFTV. “A few years ago, people would kind of frown at bulletproof backpacks, but people have accepted the idea.”Send to Email Address

Your Name

Your Email Address

Post was not sent - check your email addresses!

Email check failed, please try again

Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.Israel exists under constant threat of attack — and requires citizens to serve in the military — but still has much stricter gun laws than the United States.

And those laws limit violence.

Israel has a lower gun-related homicide rate — and that’s not because it’s an intrinsically peaceful society.

In fact, public health literature suggests that if Israel had more guns, it would have more firearm deaths.

Even those Israelis who pass through extensive hoops to get a firearm permit can only own one gun. And that’s a handgun — not a semi-automatic rifle capable of rapid fire. There are also limits on ammunition.

Many US states grant gun permits liberally, but Israel limits gun permits to people who meet strict requirements of residency, occupation, or army rank.

For instance, security workers, jewelers, hunters and West Bank residents are eligible for permits.

Forty percent of all gun permit applicants are flat-out rejected by the Israeli government.

Gun owners must renew their permits every year and immediately report any change of eligibility status to the Israeli federal government.

Israel relies on professional members of the military and police force for security, rather than “good guys with guns” or even Civil Guard volunteers.

The US has one firearm per capita, the highest in the world; second is Yemen with 0.29-0.81 firearms per capita.

Israel comes in 81st with 0.073 firearms per capita.

The Israeli government has even restricted firearm access to current Israeli soldiers when off-duty on weekends as part of a successful prevention program that has halved firearm suicide — and 80 percent of the suicide reduction appears to have come from the gun restrictions, rather than counseling.

In the past 15 years, the US suicide rate has increased by 24 percent, and two-thirds of firearm deaths are suicides.

Suicides are seen as private tragedies, whereas mass shooting events are seen as communal tragedies.

Israel considered the soldier suicide rate to be a communal tragedy, and its restriction on guns for the only part of society with gun access reduced these deaths.

The US should follow Israel’s lead.

Janet Rosenbaum is an assistant professor of epidemiology at the School of Public Health at the State University of New York Downstate in Brooklyn. She‘s studied firearm access and ownership in Israel, which has a considerably lower gun-related homicide rate than the US.Before Nikolas Cruz carried out his mass killing at a Florida high school this week, police responded to his home 39 times over a seven-year period, according to disturbing new documents.

Details about the calls to the Broward County Sheriff’s Office — obtained from police records by CNN — were not immediately available and it was impossible to determine if all involved Cruz.

But the nature of the emergencies at his Parkland home included “mentally ill person,” “child/elderly abuse,” “domestic disturbance” and “missing person,” KTLA reported.

And a schoolmate, Brody Speno, told the network that cops were called to Cruz’s home “almost every other week.”

“Something wasn’t right about him,” Speno told CNN. “He was off.”

Speno said he knew Cruz from elementary school and described him as “an evil kid” who was “always getting in trouble.”

Cruz — who posted images of himself on Instagram posing with guns and knives — has confessed to killing 17 people at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland and made an alarming online comment about a recent mass shooting.

“Man I can do so much better,” he wrote.FBI agents contacted Bennight again Wednesday, after a 19-year-old named Nikolas Cruz allegedly opened fire at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in South Florida, killing at least 17 people.

"They came to my office the next morning and asked me if I knew anything about the person," Bennight told BuzzFeed News. "I didn't. They took a copy of the screenshot and that was the last I heard from them."

Agents with the bureau's Mississippi field office got back to him "immediately," Bennight said, and conducted an in-person interview the following day, on Sept. 25.

The YouTuber, 36-year-old Ben Bennight, alerted the FBI, emailing a screenshot of the comment and calling the bureau's Mississippi field office. He also flagged the comment to YouTube, which removed it from the video.

Last fall, a Mississippi bail bondsman and frequent YouTube vlogger noticed an alarming comment left on one of his videos. "I'm going to be a professional school shooter," said a user named Nikolas Cruz.

In an email on Sept. 24, Ben Bennight alerted the FBI to a "school shooting threat" made by a YouTube user named nikolas cruz.

In the wake of the deadly shooting, questions have emerged over whether officials and acquaintances had missed warning signs about the alleged shooter, a former student who was expelled from the high school last year for disciplinary reasons.



Classmates, relatives, and neighbors have described Cruz as a troubled "loner" who often talked about guns and flaunted his obsession with weapons on his social media accounts. And Jim Gard, a math teacher at the school, told the Miami Herald that the teen had previously been identified as a potential threat to other students.

Though his name matches the YouTube user flagged in September, FBI officials would not say whether they have confirmed that the account belonged to Cruz.



But around 4:30 p.m. on Wednesday — about 30 minutes after Cruz was taken into custody by police in Broward County — Special Agent Ryan Furr with the FBI's Miami field office called Bennight and left him a voicemail.

"I think we spoke with you in the past about a complaint that you made about someone making a comment on your YouTube channel," the agent said in the message, which Bennight provided to BuzzFeed News. "I just wanted to follow up with you on that and ask you a question with something that's come up, if you wouldn't mind giving me a ring."



A few hours later, Bennight said, FBI agents in Mississippi visited him again in person, pressing for more information about the YouTube user Nikolas Cruz.

"They asked me if I knew who he was. I didn't. I don't," Bennight said. "Then they left."



When contacted by BuzzFeed News, Furr declined to comment on the call and directed questions about the shooting to the FBI's public affairs office. The office did not respond to multiple calls or emails Wednesday night.

At a press conference Thursday morning, the FBI confirmed that it had received and looked into a tip about the "professional school shooter" comment on Bennight's YouTube channel, but could not uncover any details from the account.

"No other information was included in the comment, which would indicate a time, location, or true identity of the person who made the comment," special agent Robert Lasky told reporters. "The FBI conducted database reviews, checks, but was unable to further identify the person who made the comment."

The Nikolas Cruz YouTube account remained active until Wednesday evening. It has since been deleted, however, due to "multiple or severe violations of YouTube's policy on violence." YouTube did not immediately respond to BuzzFeed News' questions about the account.Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Wednesday's attack in Parkland was the deadliest US school shooting since 2012

President Donald Trump has rebuked the FBI for missing signals before Wednesday's school shooting in Florida.

The agency was "spending too much time trying to prove Russian collusion with the Trump campaign", Mr Trump tweeted.

"There is no collusion. Get back to the basics and make us all proud."

The FBI has admitted it failed to act on a tip-off about suspected shooter Nikolas Cruz, who has confessed to the shooting at a high school in Parkland in which 17 people died.

It was the deadliest US school shooting since 2012 and has re-ignited long-running debates about tougher firearm restrictions.

Earlier, students who survived the shooting rallied in Florida, demanding tighter legislation on gun control and criticising the president for receiving financial support from the National Rifle Association (NRA) during his presidential campaign.

What was President Trump referring to?

In his tweet, he wrote: "Very sad that the FBI missed all of the many signals sent out by the Florida school shooter. This is not acceptable."

He appeared to link the agency's failures in the specific case to the time it has spent investigating possible collusion between Russia and the Trump team during the 2016 presidential campaign.

He has repeatedly denied any links with Moscow.

Earlier this week, 13 Russians were charged with interfering in the US election, in a major development in an FBI investigation now led by Special Counsel Robert Mueller.

Three Russian companies were also named in the indictment.

Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov on Saturday dismissed the charges as "blather", saying he would not comment further until he saw "facts".

What mistakes did the FBI admit to?

It said it did not properly follow up on a tip-off about Mr Cruz last month when a person close to the suspect contacted the agency to provide "information about Cruz's gun ownership, desire to kill people, erratic behaviour, and disturbing social media posts, as well as the potential of him conducting a school shooting".

The 5 January tip was not the only information the FBI received.

In September, a Mississippi man reported to the law enforcement agency a disturbing comment left on a YouTube video under Mr Cruz's name.

Mr Cruz, 19, was also reportedly investigated by local police and the Department of Children and Family Services in 2016 after posting evidence of self-harm on the Snapchat app, according to US media reports.

Child services said he had planned to buy a gun, but authorities determined he was already receiving adequate support, the reports say.

What happened at Saturday's rally in Florida?

Students and their parents - as well as politicians - took part in the event in Fort Lauderdale, close to Parkland. Thousands of people attended, according to the Associated Press.

Arguably the most memorable moment came when high school student Emma Gonzalez took to the podium and attacked the US president and other politicians for accepting political donations from the NRA, a powerful gun rights lobby group.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Student Emma Gonzalez to lawmakers: "Shame on you!"

"If the president wants to come up to me and tell me to my face that it was a terrible tragedy and... how nothing is going to be done about it, I'm going to happily ask him how much money he received from the National Rifle Association," said Ms Gonzalez.

"It doesn't matter because I already know. Thirty million dollars," the 18-year-old said.

"To every politician who is taking donations from the NRA - shame on you!" said Ms Gonzalez, who took cover on the floor of her secondary school's auditorium during the attack.

Responding to her passionate speech, the crowds started chanting "Shame on you!"

According to the Center for Responsive Politics, the NRA spent $11.4m (£8.1m) supporting Mr Trump in the 2016 campaign, and $19.7m opposing Hillary Clinton.

Image copyright Joe Raedle Image caption Wednesday's attack was the deadliest US school shooting since 2012

Ryan Deitsch, who was among those hiding in a school toilet during the attack, urged lawmakers to pass more restrictive measures on gun ownership.

"The least lawmakers can do is vote on something. What's the worst that can happen?" the 18-year-old said.

In another development, a prominent Republican donor is threatening to withhold funding from candidates who fail to endorse legislation against assault weapons.

Al Hoffman Jr, a Florida real estate developer, announced the move in an email to several Republican leaders, including the state's governor, Rick Scott, according to the New York Times.

What is Mr Trump's stance on gun control?

In a tweet late on Saturday, the Republican president accused the Democrats of not acting on gun legislation "when they had both the House & Senate during the Obama Administration.

"Because they didn't want to, and now they just talk!" he wrote, referring to criticism from Democrats following Wednesday's shooting.

The president's views on gun control have shifted over time. In recent years, he has pledged to fiercely defend the Second Amendment to the US Constitution, which protects people's right to keep and bear arms.

Last year, he told an NRA convention he would "never, ever infringe" on that right. "The eight-year assault on your Second Amendment freedoms has come to a crashing end," he said.Wasn’t there something eerily and disgracefully familiar about the news that the FBI had a highly specific warning about the murderous intentions of Nikolas Cruz, the gunman who has confessed to shooting and killing 14 students and three adults at a Florida high school Wednesday?

Doesn’t it remind you of the way that after nearly every single one of the Islamist terror attacks of the last few years – whether in America, in Britain or elsewhere – a devastating phrase soon emerges? The attacker was “known to the authorities.”

Just take the case of the 2013 Boston Marathon bombers. We learned soon afterwards that the Russian authorities handed the FBI a file on one of them, Tamerlan Tsarnaev, in 2011 detailing his links to radical Islam.

In congressional testimony, the then-director of the FBI – yes, it was our old friend Robert Mueller – also admitted that Tsarnaev had come to the attention of the FBI on two previous occasions. Worse, the FBI received two tips in 2012 regarding Tsarnaev’s links to extremists connected to a Boston mosque.

Despite all these specific warnings to the FBI, Tsarnaev and his brother went on to mount their vile attack. Three people died and hundreds were injured, including 16 who lost limbs.

The Fort Hood attacker, Army Maj. Nidal Hassan, was known to the FBI before he shot and killed 13 people and injured 30 others in 2009. The Pulse nightclub killer, Omar Mateen, who shot and killed 49 people and wounded 58 others in 2016, had been investigated by the FBI months before.

And now this: last September, the FBI received a tip about someone called “Nikolas Cruz” who was boasting online about his plans to become a “professional school shooter.” In January, there was an even more specific warning.

It’s worth reading the FBI’s statement in full:

“On January 5, 2018, a person close to Nikolas Cruz contacted the FBI’s Public Access Line (PAL) tipline to report concerns about him. The caller provided information about Cruz’s gun ownership, desire to kill people, erratic behavior, and disturbing social media posts, as well as the potential of him conducting a school shooting. Under established protocols, the information provided by the caller should have been assessed as a potential threat to life.

“The information then should have been forwarded to the FBI Miami Field Office, where appropriate investigative steps would have been taken. We have determined that these protocols were not followed for the information received by the PAL on January 5. The information was not provided to the Miami Field Office, and no further investigation was conducted at that time.”

And then the unforgivably pathetic response from FBI Special Agent Robert Lasky, that he and his colleagues “truly regret any additional pain this has caused.”

Regret? Regret? Is that the best they can do? Seventeen people are dead because of the FBI’s bungling and incompetence. The FBI looks like the Federal Bureau of Incompetence in this instance.

Of course, we should at this point add our ritual acknowledgment that the agents of the FBI are brave men and women who work hard and put themselves in danger to keep us safe. Yes, that’s true. But it’s also getting a bit tired, isn’t it?

We have to acknowledge the truth: the FBI, like so many other parts of the federal bureaucracy, is a bloated mess that seems impervious to any kind of public accountability. The leadership of the FBI seems too busy pursuing political vendettas to do its own job properly or put its own house in order.

Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., described the FBI's incompetence as "inexcusable." Florida Gov. Rick Scott called for FBI Director Christopher Wray to resign. Many Americans will agree wholeheartedly.

But this problem goes deeper than one agency – in fact, it goes to the current and vital argument about the Deep State. There is no doubt that we have a permanent bureaucracy in the U.S. government that exists primarily to pursue its own agenda, regardless of who the people elect. The FBI is unquestionably part of it.

One of the characteristics of the permanent bureaucracy is to seek to always increase its own size and power. So in the wake of incidents like Wednesday’s shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida, we inevitably get the calls for “more resources,” “more powers” and “new laws.”

These calls would be more persuasive if the FBI and other parts of the federal bureaucracy were better stewards of the resources they already have and actually used the powers they already have.

The call for new laws – instead of more competent application of the laws we already have – is precisely how we end up with a bloated bureaucracy that pursues its own agenda but fails to do its basic job.

We will be debating all this and more on “The Next Revolution” this Sunday at 9 p.m. on Fox News Channel. Hope you can join us!What Students Said About Guns After 14 of Their Classmates Were Killed Students used Twitter, the news media and a courthouse rally to pressure lawmakers for gun control after a deadly shooting at a Florida high school. Image Ellie Branson, center, was among the many teenage participants in the Not One More rally for gun legislation held at the federal courthouse in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., on Saturday. Credit Saul Martinez for The New York Times

FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. — They shouted into a microphone until their voices became hoarse. They waved handmade signs. They chanted.

And sometimes, in the middle of it all, they choked up.

At the federal courthouse here on Saturday, students — including many of the very people who had to endure the trauma of a shooting on campus — continued to speak out about guns. Since Wednesday, when a gunman killed 14 students and three staff members at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., their youthful voices have resonated where those of longtime politicians have largely fallen flat.

And on Saturday, another young woman’s words captivated the nation.

Speaking publicly at the rally, Emma González, a senior, pledged that her school would be the site of the nation’s last mass shooting. How could she know? Because, she said, she and her peers would take it upon themselves to “change the law.”

“The people in the government who are voted into power are lying to us,” she said. “And us kids seem to be the only ones who notice and are prepared to call B.S.”

“They say that tougher gun laws do not decrease gun violence — we call B.S.!” she continued as a chorus of supporters echoed her. “They say a good guy with a gun stops a bad guy with a gun — we call B.S.! They say guns are just tools like knives and are as dangerous as cars — we call B.S.! They say that no laws could have been able to prevent the hundreds of senseless tragedies that have occurred — we call B.S.! That us kids don’t know what we’re talking about, that we’re too young to understand how the government works — we call B.S. !”

She wiped her eyes aggressively. Then, she urged the people in the crowd to register to vote — and to give their elected officials “a piece of your mind.”

Just hours later, one video of the speech had been viewed more than 100,000 times.

Image Emma González, a senior at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, called for gun control in an impassioned speech that was widely spread on social media. Credit Jonathan Drake/Reuters

In a telephone interview early Sunday, Ms. González, 18, said she was surprised by the enthusiastic reaction to her speech.

“I just got off the phone with Demi Lovato,” she said. “That’s not normally something that ever should have happened.”

Ms. González said she was encouraged to speak out, in part, by other supportive people in her community, especially those who she said do not yet feel comfortable talking publicly.

“This is my whole world now,” she said. “I cannot allow myself to stop talking about this.”

A person Ms. González met at a party was killed in the shooting, she said; another person she has known for “an incredibly long time” is still in the hospital.

“Everybody needs to understand how we feel and what we went through, because if they don’t, they’re not going to be able to understand why we’re fighting for what we’re fighting for,” Ms. González said.

She noted that some have criticized students for raising their voices, suggesting that they take the time to grieve instead.

“This is the way I have to grieve,” Ms. González said. “I have to make sure that everybody knows that this isn’t something that is allowed to happen.”

Here are the voices of some other students who, like Ms. González, have spoken out in recent days.

David Hogg, 17: ‘We’re children. You guys are the adults’

While David Hogg, 17, and dozens of his Stoneman Douglas classmates were hiding in the dark in the school chef’s office, he interviewed them on camera about their views on gun policy. Mr. Hogg, a senior and the student news director, later told The New York Times that lawmakers must make schools safer.

“We need to do something,” he said. “We need to get out there and be politically active. Congress needs to get over their political bias with each other and work toward saving children’s lives.”

Referring to politicians, Mr. Hogg told CNN: “We’re children. You guys are the adults.”

Carly Novell, 17: ‘This IS about guns’

Video Just hours after 17 people were killed in a mass shooting at their high school in Parkland, Fla., students turned to social media to advocate for more gun control.

Hours after the mass shooting, surviving students turned to social media to discuss gun control. They addressed the prevalence of such attacks and why someone with a mental illness can buy a gun.

“Guns give these disgusting people the ability to kill other human beings,” Carly Novell, a 17-year-old senior who is an editor for the school’s quarterly magazine, wrote on Twitter. “This IS about guns.”

In a video interview with The Times, Ms. Novell said she was trying to use her anger fruitfully.

“People always talk about gun control and how things need to change, but nothing ever does,” she said. “And that is so frustrating.”

Tyra Hemans, 19: ‘I want to talk with’ Trump

Image Tyra Hemans, a 19-year-old senior at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High, demonstrated near the police cordon around the school. Credit Zachary Fagenson/Reuters

The public outcry from some Stoneman Douglas students was vastly different from the response of survivors of the Columbine High School shooting in 1999. Those students two decades ago did not turn to activism as they grieved.

In contrast, Tyra Hemans, a senior at Stoneman Douglas, brought a poster featuring the word “ENOUGH” to a funeral for one of her classmates on Friday. She said she also wanted to deliver a message to President Trump.

“I want our politicians to stop thinking about money and start thinking about all these lives we had lost,” she said. “I want to talk with him about changing these laws.”

Daniela Palacios, 16: ‘Change is going to come of this’

Among those who attended Saturday’s rally was Daniela Palacios, 16, a sophomore at another Broward County high school, Cypress Bay.

This was her first protest, she said, and she stood with her mother, a tiny gold cross on a chain around her neck.

Returning to school after the shooting at Stoneman Douglas had been difficult, she explained, and she said she was there to call for a ban on firearms like the semiautomatic AR-15 rifle used by the gunman.

“Wherever you bump into someone, there is the fear that they’re the next shooter,” she said, “and every bell is a gunshot.”

“I feel like some change is going to come of this,” she went on, her voice barely audible amid the roar of the crowd. “I feel hopeful.”

Ellie Branson, 16: ‘Can you include the names of the victims?’

Image Ellie Branson at the Not One More rally to support gun legislation held at the federal courthouse in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. Credit Saul Martinez for The New York Times

When the protest ended, a group of teenagers stayed behind, chanting and hugging — and chanting again.

“It could have been us,” one sign read. “My friend died for what?” said another.

“No more guns! No more guns! No more guns!” they yelled.

Among those leading the group was Ellie Branson, 16, a junior from South Broward High School. She wore a yellow and white T-shirt, her cheeks wet with tears.

When the protest finally ended, she texted a reporter.

“Can you include the names of the victims?” she asked. “Their names are more important than mine.”

Julie Turkewitz reported from Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Matt Stevens and Jason M. Bailey from New York. Jack Begg contributed research.

Sign up for California Today The news and stories that matter to Californians (and anyone else interested in the state), delivered weekday mornings. SEE SAMPLE Please verify you’re not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. * Required field You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times products and services. * Required field Thank you for subscribing. View all New York Times newsletters. An error has occurred. Please try again later. You are already subscribed to this email. View all New York Times newsletters. Sign UpOne by one, students and staff members who survived alleged gunman Nickolas Cruz’s deadly rampage at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School stepped up to a podium Saturday and railed against the gun lobby and gun laws that enabled him to purchase an assault weapon.

At times their voices broke with emotion or rage, but each person who addressed the Rally to Support Firearm Safety Legislation in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, was united in their message: The shooting should never have happened.

Play Facebook

Twitter

Embed Students call for action after Florida school mass shooting 1:44 autoplay autoplay Copy this code to your website or blog

Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School student Emma Gonzalez began her speech with a moment of silence for the 17 victims who were killed Wednesday.

"All these people should be at home grieving," she said. “But instead we are up here, standing together, because if all our government and president can do is send ‘thoughts and prayers,’ then it’s time for victims to be the change that we need to see."

Emma Gonzalez speaks at a rally for gun control at the Broward County Federal Courthouse in Fort Lauderdale, Florida on Feb. 17, 2018. NBC News

Related: Florida school shooting: These are the 17 victims

Reading from a speech scribbled on the back of her AP Government notes, Gonzalez demanded to know where the “common sense” is in America’s gun laws, and called out members of Congress who’ve accepted money and donations from the National Rifle Association.

She also had a message specifically for President Donald Trump, criticizing him for tweeting a call for action on mental health, while adding that he overturned an Obama-era law that made it harder for people with mental illness to purchase a gun.

"If the president wants to come up to me and tell me to my face that it was a 'terrible tragedy,'" she said, "I'm going to happily ask him how much money he received from the NRA."

In the crowd, students held up photos of their classmates who were killed, and at times responded to speeches with chants of "vote them out," and "Rubio must go."

Douglas High student Sarah Chadwick, whose reply to Trump's condolence tweet went viral, carried a sign that read "we don't want your thoughts and condolences, we want policy & change."

A child holds a poster at a rally for gun control at the Broward County Federal Courthouse in Fort Lauderdale, Florida on Feb. 17, 2018. NBC News

Melissa Falkowski, a Douglas High English and journalism teacher, who hid in the closet of her classroom during the shooting, spoke through tears at the rally.

"They say 'it's not the time' — Now is the time! There is no other time!" she said.

Falkowski said she has made it her life mission to fight for gun legislation and to ensure that school shootings never happen again.

David Hogg, a 17-year-old senior whose message to lawmakers went viral after the shooting, said he wanted the community to channel its pain and frustration into voting out the politicians who support gun laws.

"This fight is not going to be easy. This fight is not going to be short," he said. "The people and the special interests who want to pass gun laws and make it easier for people to get guns are not going to stop — and we can’t either."

"Now," Hogg said, "is the time that we say thank you for your prayers and your thoughts but that’s not enough."

Play Facebook

Twitter

Embed 'We call BS!' School shooting survivors, hundreds rally against gun lobby 2:25 autoplay autoplay Copy this code to your website or blog

Trump, who made no reference to the issue of gun control in an address to the nation about the shooting on Thursday, on Twitter Saturday blamed Democrats for a lack of action.

"Just like they don't want to solve the DACA problem, why didn't the Democrats pass gun control legislation when they had both the House & Senate during the Obama Administration. Because they didn't want to, and now they just talk!" the president tweeted.

Related: Trump vows mental health care fix after Florida shooting. He also wants to slash coverage.

Trump in Thursday's address said he would work to help the nation "secure our schools and tackle the difficult issue of mental health." The president on Friday visited victims of the mass shooting at a hospital.

Trump's 2019 budget proposes a substantial 22.5 percent cut to Medicaid, which funded 25 percent of all mental health spending in 2014, according to the Kaiser Foundation.

CORRECTION (Feb. 17, 2018, 7 p.m. ET): A previous version of this article misspelled the last name of a student. She is Emma Gonzalez, not Gonzales.CLOSE A beloved coach. A senior headed to college on a swimming scholarship. These are the 17 fatalities of a shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla. USA TODAY

Each week, USA TODAY's OnPolitics blog takes a look at how media from the left and the right reacted to a political news story, giving liberals and conservatives a peek into the other's media bubble.

This week the debate over how to prevent mass shootings again split largely along party lines after 17 people were killed by a former student Wednesday at a high school in Parkland, Fla.

Many on the left argued that the obvious solution is gun control, particularly restrictions on high-capacity semi-automatic rifles like the AR-15. Commentators on the right said more gun laws aren't the answer, instead calling for more armed staff in schools

Last week:: Nunes memo as 'thin as Trump's coif,' liberals say

Liberal bubble: 'Mass shootings are a national security threat'

There is a "collective failure to see the existential threat posed by guns to Americans," said Phillip Carter in Slate. "As long as it remains easy for malicious people to acquire weapons like those used in Parkland, Las Vegas, Orlando, or San Bernardino, Americans will die by the dozens."

Our country spends hundreds of billions of dollars on an intelligence and military capability to protect Americans from external threats, both real and projected. We do quite little to protect Americans at home from the very real threat of guns—a threat which took an average of 42 lives per day in 2017. Framing matters. Presenting guns as a law enforcement issue has not catalyzed an effective response; describing gun violence in public health terms has illustrated the scope of carnage, but also not generated a sufficient societal response. Perhaps presenting gun violence as a national security threat will finally galvanize America to act.

'We will be the last mass shooting': Florida students want to be the tipping point in gun debate

Conservative bubble: 'Courage is a cornerstone of gun culture'

"Every single time America is rocked by a mass shooting, the insults come raining down: Conservatives and Republican politicians who oppose new gun-control laws aren’t just wrong, they’re cowards," said the National Review's David French.

French said it is "one of the worst aspects of the modern gun debate" that Republicans oppose gun control not out of "conviction but out of craven compliance" with the NRA and its campaign contributions.

In fact, those making the argument either don’t know or don’t care about the extent to which courage is a cornerstone of gun culture. After all, what good is a firearm if a law-abiding citizen doesn’t have the courage and self-discipline to use it in self-defense or in the defense of his family and neighbors? Countless permit holders don’t just take the time to get carry licenses, they spend hours at the range. They take classes. They aspire to be brave.

More: Trump visits Florida shooting victims, vows to tackle 'mental health' issues

Liberal bubble: 'What thoughts? What prayers?'

"In our heart of hearts, we know that 'thoughts and prayers' won’t do," said The Washington Post's Colbert King.

But instead of taking action, "we thank the brave first responders. Denounce and jail the shooter — if he is still alive. Hold prayer vigils. Conduct serial funerals. Bury the dead. And, as a nation, stop right there, ignoring the cancer of mass-casualty attacks invading every corner of our national body."

As long as Trump has a grip on Congress and the NRA has his back, the AR-15 — the weapon used by the Parkland shooter — is safe. The American people can loosen that grip, and can also stand down the NRA. We have an opportunity and the means by way of the voting booth. Goodness knows, we have the motive.

More: No, there have not been 18 school shootings already this year

Conservative bubble: Stop reporting on mass shootings

It's not the Second Amendment that needs to be reined in to stop the wave of American mass shootings, Rebekah Jorgensen said. It's the First Amendment that needs an edit.

"Yes, that’s right. Stop letting these mass tragedies dominate the news cycle for entire weeks. Stop leveraging grief to try and force Congress’s collective hand. Stop bickering, virtue-signaling, and trying to figure out conspiracy theories and details," Jorgensen wrote in The Federalist.

Jorgensen graciously concedes that we shouldn't "blame the 24-hour news cycle for all mass shootings," but she does argue that if the news media would stop "weaponizing mass shootings for clicks" shooters seeking fame might be stopped.

Liberal bubble: Lift the ban on gun violence research

"Republicans and Democrats can reverse the maddening policy that has essentially shut down research on gun violence for the last 22 years," said the New Republic Emily Atkin.

The ban on funding for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, known as the Dickey Amendment, should not exist, she said.

"If Americans had this research, Congress would have a clearer picture of what effective policy steps would be to prevent these sickeningly familiar mass shootings."

More: Shooting boosts bill to allow guns in Florida schools

Conservative bubble: Arm 'protectors of the innocent'

"America is not going to become gun-free" and "mental health-focused 'solutions' are incompatible with civil liberties" so "the fact is, evil people with guns must be stopped by good people with guns," concluded Newt Gingrich.

"Every school in America should have several teachers and administrators trained in firearms who are permitted to carry concealed weapons," Gingrich proposed on Fox News Opinion. "The number of these 'protectors of the innocent' in each school should be determined by the number of students."

Comparing it the Federal Air Marshall program, Gingrich said because they would not be in uniform and would carry concealed firearms "would-be killers would have no idea who might be capable of ending their threat by ending them."

More: Why active shooter drills didn’t help in the Florida high school shooting

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2oiflyjA prominent GOP campaign donor has issued an ultimatum to Republican leaders: Introduce gun control legislation, or lose his support, the New York Times reported on Saturday.

Al Hoffman Jr., a leading donor to former President George W. Bush and Congressional Republicans, has vowed to halt all donations to the party unless leaders pass legislation to restrict access to guns and ban assault weapons, the publication said.

Seventeen people were slain and 14 people were hospitalized in Wednesday's rampage at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Broward County. The suspect, troubled 19-year-old former student Nikolas Cruz, was booked on 17 counts of premeditated murder Thursday. Authorities said he used an AR-15 assault rifle.

"For how many years now have we been doing this — having these experiences of terrorism, mass killings — and how many years has it been that nothing's been done?" Mr. Hoffman told the New York Times. "It's the end of the road for me."

Hoffman issued his ultimatum via email, addressing half dozen Republican leaders. Those included Florida Gov. Rick Scott, whom he has supported in the past and who may seek a Senatorial seat in 2018, the Times reported. Representatives for Scott did not immediately return CNBC's request for comment.

"I will not write another check unless they all support a ban on assault weapons," he wrote in an email acquired by the Times. "Enough is enough!"

Republican leaders have shown little interest in new gun legislation, following the Feb. 14 attack at a Parkland, Florida, high school, according to the Times. A previous ban on assault weapons, signed into law in 1994 by President Bill Clinton, expired in 2004 under Bush.

Hoffman has also encouraged other donors to follow in his footsteps. However, the Times reported that certain donors, including Bush family ally Mel Sambler, have already expressed that they likely won't. Sembler did not immediately return CNBC's request for comment.

--CNBC's Marty Steinberg contributed to this report.

Read more about Al Hoffman Jr.'s ultimatum from the New York Times.

Bradley Beal scored 15 points in the first round, failing to find a groove until late. (AP Photo/Chris Pizzello)

LOS ANGELES — Bradley Beal couldn’t miss in his closed practice shooting sessions. However, when the Washington Wizards guard hit the Staples Center stage Saturday night for the Three-Point Shootout, Beal’s touch deserted him in the spotlight.

Beal finished with 15 points in the first round, not enough to advance to the top three. Phoenix Suns guard Devin Booker won the contest, sizzling with an all-time high of 28 to defeat Golden State’s Klay Thompson, a former champion in the event.

Beal felt his work before the shootout might have played a role in his performance.

“I might have over-prepared myself,” Beal said. “I came in and put a little too much pressure on myself, but it was fun. I got a good experience. It’s definitely different when it’s showtime. I will say that. It’s totally different.”

[Jazz rookie Donovan Mitchell delights in a nostalgic NBA Slam Dunk Contest win]

A slow start doomed Beal. But by the time he reached the fourth rack, stacked with money balls counting for two points, he had found his rhythm. Beal knocked down four of five shots, but the sweet shooting stroke arrived too late.

In 2014, Beal came up just short in the final round and thought this time would be different. It was — but only as it related to his nerves.

“I feel like I was a little more nervous this time,” Beal said. “I feel like I was a lot stronger, clanking off the glass. Oh, man. It was just downhill from there. But it was fun. It was a great experience.”

At least Beal had a better showing than Oklahoma City’s Paul George, who finished with nine.

“Hey, I got in double digits, man,” Beal said.

Although Beal’s Saturday night did not go as planned, he still has the main event. On Sunday, Beal will make his first appearance as an all-star as a reserve selected by LeBron James.

Read more on the NBA:

Adam Silver talks playoff reseeding, one-and-dones and more at NBA All-Star Weekend

LeBron James won’t shut up and dribble: ‘I’ve defeated the odds, and I want every kid to know that’

Charles Barkley and ‘NBA on TNT’ crew rip Laura Ingraham and Fox News

‘I’m taking on all challenges’: John Wall talks rehab, relationship with Marcin Gortat

Joel Embiid is already an all-star starter. His next goal: Becoming the NBA’s best player.As noted in our most recent fact check, false information is easily spread in times of chaos and confusion. Early reports are often incorrect or incomplete and information surrounding the horrific school shooting in Florida on Wednesday is no exception.

Facebook users marked a story on the shooting from the website Woke Sloth as potentially containing unsupported claims.

“The most recent school shooter was a Trump supporter who trained with White Nationalists” the post, which has been viewed tens of thousands of times, reported.

Today the disturbing news broke that [Nikolas] Cruz had trained with an armed white supremacist group, the Republic of Florida (ROF).



According to reports, “Cruz had participated in at least one training exercise near Tallahassee area, carpooling with other ROF members from south Florida.”

The article from Woke Sloth cited a Daily Beast piece that, in turn, relied on a report from the Anti-Defamation League. The ADL reported that “a spokesperson for the white supremacist group Republic of Florida (ROF) claimed . . . that Nikolas Cruz, the man charged with the previous day’s deadly shooting spree at a Parkland, Florida, high school, was associated with his group.”

Both articles from the Daily Beast and the ADL, however, include important updates to the story that Woke Sloth’s report does not.

On Thursday afternoon, Broward County Sheriff Scott Israel said claims that Cruz was associated with ROF are “not confirmed at this time” and that the police were still investigating potential connections.

Lt. Grady Jordan told reporters that his office (Leon County Sheriff’s Office in Tallahassee) has arrested the spokesperson for ROF, Jordan Jereb, “at least four times” according to the Associated Press, and that the group had no known connection to Cruz.

“His office has ‘very solid’ information on the group and ‘there’s no known ties that we have that we can connect’ 19-year-old Nikolas Cruz with the group,” the AP reported.

On Thursday afternoon, Jereb himsel—the spokesman for the white supremacist group—wrote online that he may have been mistaken in linking Cruz with his organization (the ADL noted this change of testimony in its update to the original report).

Additionally, the Southern Poverty Law Center, a left-wing organization, noted Thursday that Jereb was an attention seeker that other White Nationalists say “never misses a photo op” and is “a nut job who should be avoided.” In 2014, Jereb “wrote [the SPLC] to complain that [they] had not already listed ROF as a hate group,” the article says. “It may seem odd that Jereb would bring attention to his group by claiming a connection to Cruz, but Jereb has always been somewhat of a publicity seeker.”

Articles claiming that Cruz is demonstrably connected to the ROF may be missing key information that casts doubt on those alleged ties. The evidence that Cruz was a “Trump supporter” comes from reports by students that Cruz wore a “Make America Great Again” hat around the school and that he posed with the hat in a picture on Instagram.

As with most reporting after tragic and chaotic events, more information is required to back up or refute certain assertions.

If you have questions about this fact check, or would like to submit a request for another fact check, email Holmes Lybrand at hlybrand@weeklystandard.com or the Weekly Standard at factcheck@weeklystandard.com. For details on TWS Fact Check, see our explainer here.CLAIM

"The Simpsons" predicted that there would be a mass shooting at a screening of the movie "Black Panther."

FALSE

RATING

FALSE

ORIGIN

Popular animated television show ‘The Simpsons’ has gained a reputation for “predicting” the future over the years. Although we’d probably classify these predictions as coincidences (and have repeatedly noted that many of these predictions were actually hoaxes or misrepresented in some way), some internet users have come to see the show as some sort of window into the future.

So when rumors started circulating that the long-running show had predicted a mass shooting at a screening of the movie “Black Panther,” they were often accompanied by messages warning moviegoers to be careful or to even bring weapons to the theater:

This is not a genuine screenshot from The Simpsons.

For one, the geography in this still simply makes no logical sense. The bottom portion of the image features Ned Flanders looking down at a park. The image of the movie theater was shoehorned into this image, cutting off a bush and a field, in a way that simply isn’t plausible, even for the cartoon town of Springfield.

The image of Ned Flanders holding a sniper rifle did truly come from an episode of The Simpsons. However, Homer Simpson’s neighbor was not targeting moviegoers outside a screening of the movie Black Panther. This clip comes from the episode “Homer Loves Flanders,” which aired during the show’s 5th season in 1994, and featured Flanders fantasizing about killing Homer during a dream sequence:

This clip appears to be referencing the movie The Deadly Tower which was based off a real-world shooting that took place in 1966 at the University of Texas:

1966 University of Texas Shooting: When Flanders, during a dream sequence, begins to shoot citizens at random from the vantage point of a clock tower, he is mirroring the 1966 actions of real life mass shooter Charles Whitman. The Deadly Tower: It was also based on the events of the film The Deadly Tower, which was itself based on the event listed above.

The movie theater portion of the viral image did not originate in The Simpsons. This is merely a piece of clipart that was cropped, distorted, and graffitied with the words “Black Panther”:

Black Panther earned rave reviews before its premiere on 16 February 2018 and was expected to set a few box office records. Some racist internet users seemed perturbed over the movie’s projected success, however, in large part due to the nearly all black cast.

As moviegoers lined up for tickets for the film, internet trolls also started posting violent pictures (from unrelated events) along with fictional stories about how they had been mugged or beaten up at one of the screenings. They urged moviegoers to stay away from the theater or, at the very least, to bring weapons so that they could defend themselves.

Not only is this image purportedly showing Ned Flanders opening fire outside of a screening for Black Panther fake, it is also dangerous, stirring unfounded fears and calling for taking weapons to a movie theater.

We’ve reported this image to the FBI.In the wake of the tragic school shooting yesterday in Parkland, Florida fake photos began to surface, spreading misinformation and false accusations surrounding the event.

The anonymous Twitter account “MAGA Pill” shared a picture of what it claimed was an article from Buzzfeed titled, “Why We Need To Take Away White People’s Guns Now More Than Ever” by a “Richie Horowitz.” (The tweet has since been deleted. You can see a screenshot of it here.)

The photo is a fake. The picture of “Richie Horowitz” in the photo is actually BuzzFeed reporter Salvador Hernandez, who tweeted out the fake photo and noted that he was not “Horowitz.”

That’s my picture. That’s a fake story. And my name is not Richie Horowitz.



K, bye pic.twitter.com/5II9TuaSav— Salvador Hernandez (@SalHernandez) February 15, 2018

The actual story on Buzzfeed from which the fake is derived is titled “At Least 17 People Are Dead In A Florida School Shooting,” is by Hernandez, and makes no reference whatsoever to taking white people’s guns away. The headline and the author’s name were changed on the fake image posted by MAGA Pill, while the time of publishing, the subhead, and the picture of Hernandez were all in the original. Importantly, the MAGA Pill tweet included no link to the Buzzfeed story—only the faked image.

Buzzfeed reported that Lucian Wintrich, the White House correspondent for the site Gateway Pundit, shared the fake screenshot on Twitter. Wintrich then deleted his tweet when it was pointed out that the purported article was a forgery.

Miami Herald reporter Alex Harris was also the target of online image forgery. A tweet of hers was altered to make it look as though she had asked students if the shooter was white.

This is going to sting for a long time, Alex Harris. pic.twitter.com/7r5W0BgWTx— Ignignokt (@FTBLFN1) February 15, 2018

Harris never asked about the racial identity of the shooter. Here’s her actual, undoctored tweet:

Hi Mads, I'm so sorry to hear that you and your friends went through such a trauma. It's good to hear you guys are safe. I know you're overwhelmed right now, but if you're comfortable with it I'd like to ask you questions for the @MiamiHerald. Follow back if it's OK to DM— Alex Harris (@harrisalexc) February 14, 2018

Twitter users also shared a fake image claiming that Harris asked to get pictures and video of the event, including of “the dead bodies.” This forged photo looks to have originally been tweeted by @sadness_enjoyer.

Here’s what Harris actually tweeted:

Hi Alan, I'm heartbroken to hear about your friend. I hope your friend is OK. I know you're probably overwhelmed right now, but if you'd be comfortable talking to me about it for the @MiamiHerald , you can follow back to DM— Alex Harris (@harrisalexc) February 14, 2018

The fake pictures were shared multiple times on Twitter and generated a great deal of misinformed outrage toward Harris.

False information is easiest to spread in times of tragedy, chaos, and confusion. Don’t fall for it.

If you have questions about this fact check, or would like to submit a request for another fact check, email Holmes Lybrand at hlybrand@weeklystandard.com or the Weekly Standard at factcheck@weeklystandard.com. For details on TWS Fact Check, see our explainer here.FBI agents contacted Bennight again Wednesday, after a 19-year-old named Nikolas Cruz allegedly opened fire at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in South Florida, killing at least 17 people.

"They came to my office the next morning and asked me if I knew anything about the person," Bennight told BuzzFeed News. "I didn't. They took a copy of the screenshot and that was the last I heard from them."

Agents with the bureau's Mississippi field office got back to him "immediately," Bennight said, and conducted an in-person interview the following day, on Sept. 25.

The YouTuber, 36-year-old Ben Bennight, alerted the FBI, emailing a screenshot of the comment and calling the bureau's Mississippi field office. He also flagged the comment to YouTube, which removed it from the video.

Last fall, a Mississippi bail bondsman and frequent YouTube vlogger noticed an alarming comment left on one of his videos. "I'm going to be a professional school shooter," said a user named Nikolas Cruz.

In an email on Sept. 24, Ben Bennight alerted the FBI to a "school shooting threat" made by a YouTube user named nikolas cruz.

In the wake of the deadly shooting, questions have emerged over whether officials and acquaintances had missed warning signs about the alleged shooter, a former student who was expelled from the high school last year for disciplinary reasons.



Classmates, relatives, and neighbors have described Cruz as a troubled "loner" who often talked about guns and flaunted his obsession with weapons on his social media accounts. And Jim Gard, a math teacher at the school, told the Miami Herald that the teen had previously been identified as a potential threat to other students.

Though his name matches the YouTube user flagged in September, FBI officials would not say whether they have confirmed that the account belonged to Cruz.



But around 4:30 p.m. on Wednesday — about 30 minutes after Cruz was taken into custody by police in Broward County — Special Agent Ryan Furr with the FBI's Miami field office called Bennight and left him a voicemail.

"I think we spoke with you in the past about a complaint that you made about someone making a comment on your YouTube channel," the agent said in the message, which Bennight provided to BuzzFeed News. "I just wanted to follow up with you on that and ask you a question with something that's come up, if you wouldn't mind giving me a ring."



A few hours later, Bennight said, FBI agents in Mississippi visited him again in person, pressing for more information about the YouTube user Nikolas Cruz.

"They asked me if I knew who he was. I didn't. I don't," Bennight said. "Then they left."



When contacted by BuzzFeed News, Furr declined to comment on the call and directed questions about the shooting to the FBI's public affairs office. The office did not respond to multiple calls or emails Wednesday night.

At a press conference Thursday morning, the FBI confirmed that it had received and looked into a tip about the "professional school shooter" comment on Bennight's YouTube channel, but could not uncover any details from the account.

"No other information was included in the comment, which would indicate a time, location, or true identity of the person who made the comment," special agent Robert Lasky told reporters. "The FBI conducted database reviews, checks, but was unable to further identify the person who made the comment."

The Nikolas Cruz YouTube account remained active until Wednesday evening. It has since been deleted, however, due to "multiple or severe violations of YouTube's policy on violence." YouTube did not immediately respond to BuzzFeed News' questions about the account.Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Wednesday's attack in Parkland was the deadliest US school shooting since 2012

President Donald Trump has rebuked the FBI for missing signals before Wednesday's school shooting in Florida.

The agency was "spending too much time trying to prove Russian collusion with the Trump campaign", Mr Trump tweeted.

"There is no collusion. Get back to the basics and make us all proud."

The FBI has admitted it failed to act on a tip-off about suspected shooter Nikolas Cruz, who has confessed to the shooting at a high school in Parkland in which 17 people died.

It was the deadliest US school shooting since 2012 and has re-ignited long-running debates about tougher firearm restrictions.

Earlier, students who survived the shooting rallied in Florida, demanding tighter legislation on gun control and criticising the president for receiving financial support from the National Rifle Association (NRA) during his presidential campaign.

What was President Trump referring to?

In his tweet, he wrote: "Very sad that the FBI missed all of the many signals sent out by the Florida school shooter. This is not acceptable."

He appeared to link the agency's failures in the specific case to the time it has spent investigating possible collusion between Russia and the Trump team during the 2016 presidential campaign.

He has repeatedly denied any links with Moscow.

Earlier this week, 13 Russians were charged with interfering in the US election, in a major development in an FBI investigation now led by Special Counsel Robert Mueller.

Three Russian companies were also named in the indictment.

Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov on Saturday dismissed the charges as "blather", saying he would not comment further until he saw "facts".

What mistakes did the FBI admit to?

It said it did not properly follow up on a tip-off about Mr Cruz last month when a person close to the suspect contacted the agency to provide "information about Cruz's gun ownership, desire to kill people, erratic behaviour, and disturbing social media posts, as well as the potential of him conducting a school shooting".

The 5 January tip was not the only information the FBI received.

In September, a Mississippi man reported to the law enforcement agency a disturbing comment left on a YouTube video under Mr Cruz's name.

Mr Cruz, 19, was also reportedly investigated by local police and the Department of Children and Family Services in 2016 after posting evidence of self-harm on the Snapchat app, according to US media reports.

Child services said he had planned to buy a gun, but authorities determined he was already receiving adequate support, the reports say.

What happened at Saturday's rally in Florida?

Students and their parents - as well as politicians - took part in the event in Fort Lauderdale, close to Parkland. Thousands of people attended, according to the Associated Press.

Arguably the most memorable moment came when high school student Emma Gonzalez took to the podium and attacked the US president and other politicians for accepting political donations from the NRA, a powerful gun rights lobby group.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Student Emma Gonzalez to lawmakers: "Shame on you!"

"If the president wants to come up to me and tell me to my face that it was a terrible tragedy and... how nothing is going to be done about it, I'm going to happily ask him how much money he received from the National Rifle Association," said Ms Gonzalez.

"It doesn't matter because I already know. Thirty million dollars," the 18-year-old said.

"To every politician who is taking donations from the NRA - shame on you!" said Ms Gonzalez, who took cover on the floor of her secondary school's auditorium during the attack.

Responding to her passionate speech, the crowds started chanting "Shame on you!"

According to the Center for Responsive Politics, the NRA spent $11.4m (£8.1m) supporting Mr Trump in the 2016 campaign, and $19.7m opposing Hillary Clinton.

Image copyright Joe Raedle Image caption Wednesday's attack was the deadliest US school shooting since 2012

Ryan Deitsch, who was among those hiding in a school toilet during the attack, urged lawmakers to pass more restrictive measures on gun ownership.

"The least lawmakers can do is vote on something. What's the worst that can happen?" the 18-year-old said.

In another development, a prominent Republican donor is threatening to withhold funding from candidates who fail to endorse legislation against assault weapons.

Al Hoffman Jr, a Florida real estate developer, announced the move in an email to several Republican leaders, including the state's governor, Rick Scott, according to the New York Times.

What is Mr Trump's stance on gun control?

In a tweet late on Saturday, the Republican president accused the Democrats of not acting on gun legislation "when they had both the House & Senate during the Obama Administration.

"Because they didn't want to, and now they just talk!" he wrote, referring to criticism from Democrats following Wednesday's shooting.

The president's views on gun control have shifted over time. In recent years, he has pledged to fiercely defend the Second Amendment to the US Constitution, which protects people's right to keep and bear arms.

Last year, he told an NRA convention he would "never, ever infringe" on that right. "The eight-year assault on your Second Amendment freedoms has come to a crashing end," he said.Wasn’t there something eerily and disgracefully familiar about the news that the FBI had a highly specific warning about the murderous intentions of Nikolas Cruz, the gunman who has confessed to shooting and killing 14 students and three adults at a Florida high school Wednesday?

Doesn’t it remind you of the way that after nearly every single one of the Islamist terror attacks of the last few years – whether in America, in Britain or elsewhere – a devastating phrase soon emerges? The attacker was “known to the authorities.”

Just take the case of the 2013 Boston Marathon bombers. We learned soon afterwards that the Russian authorities handed the FBI a file on one of them, Tamerlan Tsarnaev, in 2011 detailing his links to radical Islam.

In congressional testimony, the then-director of the FBI – yes, it was our old friend Robert Mueller – also admitted that Tsarnaev had come to the attention of the FBI on two previous occasions. Worse, the FBI received two tips in 2012 regarding Tsarnaev’s links to extremists connected to a Boston mosque.

Despite all these specific warnings to the FBI, Tsarnaev and his brother went on to mount their vile attack. Three people died and hundreds were injured, including 16 who lost limbs.

The Fort Hood attacker, Army Maj. Nidal Hassan, was known to the FBI before he shot and killed 13 people and injured 30 others in 2009. The Pulse nightclub killer, Omar Mateen, who shot and killed 49 people and wounded 58 others in 2016, had been investigated by the FBI months before.

And now this: last September, the FBI received a tip about someone called “Nikolas Cruz” who was boasting online about his plans to become a “professional school shooter.” In January, there was an even more specific warning.

It’s worth reading the FBI’s statement in full:

“On January 5, 2018, a person close to Nikolas Cruz contacted the FBI’s Public Access Line (PAL) tipline to report concerns about him. The caller provided information about Cruz’s gun ownership, desire to kill people, erratic behavior, and disturbing social media posts, as well as the potential of him conducting a school shooting. Under established protocols, the information provided by the caller should have been assessed as a potential threat to life.

“The information then should have been forwarded to the FBI Miami Field Office, where appropriate investigative steps would have been taken. We have determined that these protocols were not followed for the information received by the PAL on January 5. The information was not provided to the Miami Field Office, and no further investigation was conducted at that time.”

And then the unforgivably pathetic response from FBI Special Agent Robert Lasky, that he and his colleagues “truly regret any additional pain this has caused.”

Regret? Regret? Is that the best they can do? Seventeen people are dead because of the FBI’s bungling and incompetence. The FBI looks like the Federal Bureau of Incompetence in this instance.

Of course, we should at this point add our ritual acknowledgment that the agents of the FBI are brave men and women who work hard and put themselves in danger to keep us safe. Yes, that’s true. But it’s also getting a bit tired, isn’t it?

We have to acknowledge the truth: the FBI, like so many other parts of the federal bureaucracy, is a bloated mess that seems impervious to any kind of public accountability. The leadership of the FBI seems too busy pursuing political vendettas to do its own job properly or put its own house in order.

Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., described the FBI's incompetence as "inexcusable." Florida Gov. Rick Scott called for FBI Director Christopher Wray to resign. Many Americans will agree wholeheartedly.

But this problem goes deeper than one agency – in fact, it goes to the current and vital argument about the Deep State. There is no doubt that we have a permanent bureaucracy in the U.S. government that exists primarily to pursue its own agenda, regardless of who the people elect. The FBI is unquestionably part of it.

One of the characteristics of the permanent bureaucracy is to seek to always increase its own size and power. So in the wake of incidents like Wednesday’s shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida, we inevitably get the calls for “more resources,” “more powers” and “new laws.”

These calls would be more persuasive if the FBI and other parts of the federal bureaucracy were better stewards of the resources they already have and actually used the powers they already have.

The call for new laws – instead of more competent application of the laws we already have – is precisely how we end up with a bloated bureaucracy that pursues its own agenda but fails to do its basic job.

We will be debating all this and more on “The Next Revolution” this Sunday at 9 p.m. on Fox News Channel. Hope you can join us!What Students Said About Guns After 14 of Their Classmates Were Killed Students used Twitter, the news media and a courthouse rally to pressure lawmakers for gun control after a deadly shooting at a Florida high school. Image Ellie Branson, center, was among the many teenage participants in the Not One More rally for gun legislation held at the federal courthouse in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., on Saturday. Credit Saul Martinez for The New York Times

FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. — They shouted into a microphone until their voices became hoarse. They waved handmade signs. They chanted.

And sometimes, in the middle of it all, they choked up.

At the federal courthouse here on Saturday, students — including many of the very people who had to endure the trauma of a shooting on campus — continued to speak out about guns. Since Wednesday, when a gunman killed 14 students and three staff members at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., their youthful voices have resonated where those of longtime politicians have largely fallen flat.

And on Saturday, another young woman’s words captivated the nation.

Speaking publicly at the rally, Emma González, a senior, pledged that her school would be the site of the nation’s last mass shooting. How could she know? Because, she said, she and her peers would take it upon themselves to “change the law.”

“The people in the government who are voted into power are lying to us,” she said. “And us kids seem to be the only ones who notice and are prepared to call B.S.”

“They say that tougher gun laws do not decrease gun violence — we call B.S.!” she continued as a chorus of supporters echoed her. “They say a good guy with a gun stops a bad guy with a gun — we call B.S.! They say guns are just tools like knives and are as dangerous as cars — we call B.S.! They say that no laws could have been able to prevent the hundreds of senseless tragedies that have occurred — we call B.S.! That us kids don’t know what we’re talking about, that we’re too young to understand how the government works — we call B.S. !”

She wiped her eyes aggressively. Then, she urged the people in the crowd to register to vote — and to give their elected officials “a piece of your mind.”

Just hours later, one video of the speech had been viewed more than 100,000 times.

Image Emma González, a senior at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, called for gun control in an impassioned speech that was widely spread on social media. Credit Jonathan Drake/Reuters

In a telephone interview early Sunday, Ms. González, 18, said she was surprised by the enthusiastic reaction to her speech.

“I just got off the phone with Demi Lovato,” she said. “That’s not normally something that ever should have happened.”

Ms. González said she was encouraged to speak out, in part, by other supportive people in her community, especially those who she said do not yet feel comfortable talking publicly.

“This is my whole world now,” she said. “I cannot allow myself to stop talking about this.”

A person Ms. González met at a party was killed in the shooting, she said; another person she has known for “an incredibly long time” is still in the hospital.

“Everybody needs to understand how we feel and what we went through, because if they don’t, they’re not going to be able to understand why we’re fighting for what we’re fighting for,” Ms. González said.

She noted that some have criticized students for raising their voices, suggesting that they take the time to grieve instead.

“This is the way I have to grieve,” Ms. González said. “I have to make sure that everybody knows that this isn’t something that is allowed to happen.”

Here are the voices of some other students who, like Ms. González, have spoken out in recent days.

David Hogg, 17: ‘We’re children. You guys are the adults’

While David Hogg, 17, and dozens of his Stoneman Douglas classmates were hiding in the dark in the school chef’s office, he interviewed them on camera about their views on gun policy. Mr. Hogg, a senior and the student news director, later told The New York Times that lawmakers must make schools safer.

“We need to do something,” he said. “We need to get out there and be politically active. Congress needs to get over their political bias with each other and work toward saving children’s lives.”

Referring to politicians, Mr. Hogg told CNN: “We’re children. You guys are the adults.”

Carly Novell, 17: ‘This IS about guns’

Video Just hours after 17 people were killed in a mass shooting at their high school in Parkland, Fla., students turned to social media to advocate for more gun control.

Hours after the mass shooting, surviving students turned to social media to discuss gun control. They addressed the prevalence of such attacks and why someone with a mental illness can buy a gun.

“Guns give these disgusting people the ability to kill other human beings,” Carly Novell, a 17-year-old senior who is an editor for the school’s quarterly magazine, wrote on Twitter. “This IS about guns.”

In a video interview with The Times, Ms. Novell said she was trying to use her anger fruitfully.

“People always talk about gun control and how things need to change, but nothing ever does,” she said. “And that is so frustrating.”

Tyra Hemans, 19: ‘I want to talk with’ Trump

Image Tyra Hemans, a 19-year-old senior at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High, demonstrated near the police cordon around the school. Credit Zachary Fagenson/Reuters

The public outcry from some Stoneman Douglas students was vastly different from the response of survivors of the Columbine High School shooting in 1999. Those students two decades ago did not turn to activism as they grieved.

In contrast, Tyra Hemans, a senior at Stoneman Douglas, brought a poster featuring the word “ENOUGH” to a funeral for one of her classmates on Friday. She said she also wanted to deliver a message to President Trump.

“I want our politicians to stop thinking about money and start thinking about all these lives we had lost,” she said. “I want to talk with him about changing these laws.”

Daniela Palacios, 16: ‘Change is going to come of this’

Among those who attended Saturday’s rally was Daniela Palacios, 16, a sophomore at another Broward County high school, Cypress Bay.

This was her first protest, she said, and she stood with her mother, a tiny gold cross on a chain around her neck.

Returning to school after the shooting at Stoneman Douglas had been difficult, she explained, and she said she was there to call for a ban on firearms like the semiautomatic AR-15 rifle used by the gunman.

“Wherever you bump into someone, there is the fear that they’re the next shooter,” she said, “and every bell is a gunshot.”

“I feel like some change is going to come of this,” she went on, her voice barely audible amid the roar of the crowd. “I feel hopeful.”

Ellie Branson, 16: ‘Can you include the names of the victims?’

Image Ellie Branson at the Not One More rally to support gun legislation held at the federal courthouse in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. Credit Saul Martinez for The New York Times

When the protest ended, a group of teenagers stayed behind, chanting and hugging — and chanting again.

“It could have been us,” one sign read. “My friend died for what?” said another.

“No more guns! No more guns! No more guns!” they yelled.

Among those leading the group was Ellie Branson, 16, a junior from South Broward High School. She wore a yellow and white T-shirt, her cheeks wet with tears.

When the protest finally ended, she texted a reporter.

“Can you include the names of the victims?” she asked. “Their names are more important than mine.”

Julie Turkewitz reported from Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Matt Stevens and Jason M. Bailey from New York. Jack Begg contributed research.

Sign up for California Today The news and stories that matter to Californians (and anyone else interested in the state), delivered weekday mornings. SEE SAMPLE Please verify you’re not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. * Required field You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times products and services. * Required field Thank you for subscribing. View all New York Times newsletters. An error has occurred. Please try again later. You are already subscribed to this email. View all New York Times newsletters. Sign UpOne by one, students and staff members who survived alleged gunman Nickolas Cruz’s deadly rampage at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School stepped up to a podium Saturday and railed against the gun lobby and gun laws that enabled him to purchase an assault weapon.

At times their voices broke with emotion or rage, but each person who addressed the Rally to Support Firearm Safety Legislation in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, was united in their message: The shooting should never have happened.

Play Facebook

Twitter

Embed Students call for action after Florida school mass shooting 1:44 autoplay autoplay Copy this code to your website or blog

Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School student Emma Gonzalez began her speech with a moment of silence for the 17 victims who were killed Wednesday.

"All these people should be at home grieving," she said. “But instead we are up here, standing together, because if all our government and president can do is send ‘thoughts and prayers,’ then it’s time for victims to be the change that we need to see."

Emma Gonzalez speaks at a rally for gun control at the Broward County Federal Courthouse in Fort Lauderdale, Florida on Feb. 17, 2018. NBC News

Related: Florida school shooting: These are the 17 victims

Reading from a speech scribbled on the back of her AP Government notes, Gonzalez demanded to know where the “common sense” is in America’s gun laws, and called out members of Congress who’ve accepted money and donations from the National Rifle Association.

She also had a message specifically for President Donald Trump, criticizing him for tweeting a call for action on mental health, while adding that he overturned an Obama-era law that made it harder for people with mental illness to purchase a gun.

"If the president wants to come up to me and tell me to my face that it was a 'terrible tragedy,'" she said, "I'm going to happily ask him how much money he received from the NRA."

In the crowd, students held up photos of their classmates who were killed, and at times responded to speeches with chants of "vote them out," and "Rubio must go."

Douglas High student Sarah Chadwick, whose reply to Trump's condolence tweet went viral, carried a sign that read "we don't want your thoughts and condolences, we want policy & change."

A child holds a poster at a rally for gun control at the Broward County Federal Courthouse in Fort Lauderdale, Florida on Feb. 17, 2018. NBC News

Melissa Falkowski, a Douglas High English and journalism teacher, who hid in the closet of her classroom during the shooting, spoke through tears at the rally.

"They say 'it's not the time' — Now is the time! There is no other time!" she said.

Falkowski said she has made it her life mission to fight for gun legislation and to ensure that school shootings never happen again.

David Hogg, a 17-year-old senior whose message to lawmakers went viral after the shooting, said he wanted the community to channel its pain and frustration into voting out the politicians who support gun laws.

"This fight is not going to be easy. This fight is not going to be short," he said. "The people and the special interests who want to pass gun laws and make it easier for people to get guns are not going to stop — and we can’t either."

"Now," Hogg said, "is the time that we say thank you for your prayers and your thoughts but that’s not enough."

Play Facebook

Twitter

Embed 'We call BS!' School shooting survivors, hundreds rally against gun lobby 2:25 autoplay autoplay Copy this code to your website or blog

Trump, who made no reference to the issue of gun control in an address to the nation about the shooting on Thursday, on Twitter Saturday blamed Democrats for a lack of action.

"Just like they don't want to solve the DACA problem, why didn't the Democrats pass gun control legislation when they had both the House & Senate during the Obama Administration. Because they didn't want to, and now they just talk!" the president tweeted.

Related: Trump vows mental health care fix after Florida shooting. He also wants to slash coverage.

Trump in Thursday's address said he would work to help the nation "secure our schools and tackle the difficult issue of mental health." The president on Friday visited victims of the mass shooting at a hospital.

Trump's 2019 budget proposes a substantial 22.5 percent cut to Medicaid, which funded 25 percent of all mental health spending in 2014, according to the Kaiser Foundation.

CORRECTION (Feb. 17, 2018, 7 p.m. ET): A previous version of this article misspelled the last name of a student. She is Emma Gonzalez, not Gonzales.CLOSE A beloved coach. A senior headed to college on a swimming scholarship. These are the 17 fatalities of a shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla. USA TODAY

Each week, USA TODAY's OnPolitics blog takes a look at how media from the left and the right reacted to a political news story, giving liberals and conservatives a peek into the other's media bubble.

This week the debate over how to prevent mass shootings again split largely along party lines after 17 people were killed by a former student Wednesday at a high school in Parkland, Fla.

Many on the left argued that the obvious solution is gun control, particularly restrictions on high-capacity semi-automatic rifles like the AR-15. Commentators on the right said more gun laws aren't the answer, instead calling for more armed staff in schools

Last week:: Nunes memo as 'thin as Trump's coif,' liberals say

Liberal bubble: 'Mass shootings are a national security threat'

There is a "collective failure to see the existential threat posed by guns to Americans," said Phillip Carter in Slate. "As long as it remains easy for malicious people to acquire weapons like those used in Parkland, Las Vegas, Orlando, or San Bernardino, Americans will die by the dozens."

Our country spends hundreds of billions of dollars on an intelligence and military capability to protect Americans from external threats, both real and projected. We do quite little to protect Americans at home from the very real threat of guns—a threat which took an average of 42 lives per day in 2017. Framing matters. Presenting guns as a law enforcement issue has not catalyzed an effective response; describing gun violence in public health terms has illustrated the scope of carnage, but also not generated a sufficient societal response. Perhaps presenting gun violence as a national security threat will finally galvanize America to act.

'We will be the last mass shooting': Florida students want to be the tipping point in gun debate

Conservative bubble: 'Courage is a cornerstone of gun culture'

"Every single time America is rocked by a mass shooting, the insults come raining down: Conservatives and Republican politicians who oppose new gun-control laws aren’t just wrong, they’re cowards," said the National Review's David French.

French said it is "one of the worst aspects of the modern gun debate" that Republicans oppose gun control not out of "conviction but out of craven compliance" with the NRA and its campaign contributions.

In fact, those making the argument either don’t know or don’t care about the extent to which courage is a cornerstone of gun culture. After all, what good is a firearm if a law-abiding citizen doesn’t have the courage and self-discipline to use it in self-defense or in the defense of his family and neighbors? Countless permit holders don’t just take the time to get carry licenses, they spend hours at the range. They take classes. They aspire to be brave.

More: Trump visits Florida shooting victims, vows to tackle 'mental health' issues

Liberal bubble: 'What thoughts? What prayers?'

"In our heart of hearts, we know that 'thoughts and prayers' won’t do," said The Washington Post's Colbert King.

But instead of taking action, "we thank the brave first responders. Denounce and jail the shooter — if he is still alive. Hold prayer vigils. Conduct serial funerals. Bury the dead. And, as a nation, stop right there, ignoring the cancer of mass-casualty attacks invading every corner of our national body."

As long as Trump has a grip on Congress and the NRA has his back, the AR-15 — the weapon used by the Parkland shooter — is safe. The American people can loosen that grip, and can also stand down the NRA. We have an opportunity and the means by way of the voting booth. Goodness knows, we have the motive.

More: No, there have not been 18 school shootings already this year

Conservative bubble: Stop reporting on mass shootings

It's not the Second Amendment that needs to be reined in to stop the wave of American mass shootings, Rebekah Jorgensen said. It's the First Amendment that needs an edit.

"Yes, that’s right. Stop letting these mass tragedies dominate the news cycle for entire weeks. Stop leveraging grief to try and force Congress’s collective hand. Stop bickering, virtue-signaling, and trying to figure out conspiracy theories and details," Jorgensen wrote in The Federalist.

Jorgensen graciously concedes that we shouldn't "blame the 24-hour news cycle for all mass shootings," but she does argue that if the news media would stop "weaponizing mass shootings for clicks" shooters seeking fame might be stopped.

Liberal bubble: Lift the ban on gun violence research

"Republicans and Democrats can reverse the maddening policy that has essentially shut down research on gun violence for the last 22 years," said the New Republic Emily Atkin.

The ban on funding for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, known as the Dickey Amendment, should not exist, she said.

"If Americans had this research, Congress would have a clearer picture of what effective policy steps would be to prevent these sickeningly familiar mass shootings."

More: Shooting boosts bill to allow guns in Florida schools

Conservative bubble: Arm 'protectors of the innocent'

"America is not going to become gun-free" and "mental health-focused 'solutions' are incompatible with civil liberties" so "the fact is, evil people with guns must be stopped by good people with guns," concluded Newt Gingrich.

"Every school in America should have several teachers and administrators trained in firearms who are permitted to carry concealed weapons," Gingrich proposed on Fox News Opinion. "The number of these 'protectors of the innocent' in each school should be determined by the number of students."

Comparing it the Federal Air Marshall program, Gingrich said because they would not be in uniform and would carry concealed firearms "would-be killers would have no idea who might be capable of ending their threat by ending them."

More: Why active shooter drills didn’t help in the Florida high school shooting

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2oiflyjA prominent GOP campaign donor has issued an ultimatum to Republican leaders: Introduce gun control legislation, or lose his support, the New York Times reported on Saturday.

Al Hoffman Jr., a leading donor to former President George W. Bush and Congressional Republicans, has vowed to halt all donations to the party unless leaders pass legislation to restrict access to guns and ban assault weapons, the publication said.

Seventeen people were slain and 14 people were hospitalized in Wednesday's rampage at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Broward County. The suspect, troubled 19-year-old former student Nikolas Cruz, was booked on 17 counts of premeditated murder Thursday. Authorities said he used an AR-15 assault rifle.

"For how many years now have we been doing this — having these experiences of terrorism, mass killings — and how many years has it been that nothing's been done?" Mr. Hoffman told the New York Times. "It's the end of the road for me."

Hoffman issued his ultimatum via email, addressing half dozen Republican leaders. Those included Florida Gov. Rick Scott, whom he has supported in the past and who may seek a Senatorial seat in 2018, the Times reported. Representatives for Scott did not immediately return CNBC's request for comment.

"I will not write another check unless they all support a ban on assault weapons," he wrote in an email acquired by the Times. "Enough is enough!"

Republican leaders have shown little interest in new gun legislation, following the Feb. 14 attack at a Parkland, Florida, high school, according to the Times. A previous ban on assault weapons, signed into law in 1994 by President Bill Clinton, expired in 2004 under Bush.

Hoffman has also encouraged other donors to follow in his footsteps. However, the Times reported that certain donors, including Bush family ally Mel Sambler, have already expressed that they likely won't. Sembler did not immediately return CNBC's request for comment.

--CNBC's Marty Steinberg contributed to this report.

Read more about Al Hoffman Jr.'s ultimatum from the New York Times.

Bradley Beal scored 15 points in the first round, failing to find a groove until late. (AP Photo/Chris Pizzello)

LOS ANGELES — Bradley Beal couldn’t miss in his closed practice shooting sessions. However, when the Washington Wizards guard hit the Staples Center stage Saturday night for the Three-Point Shootout, Beal’s touch deserted him in the spotlight.

Beal finished with 15 points in the first round, not enough to advance to the top three. Phoenix Suns guard Devin Booker won the contest, sizzling with an all-time high of 28 to defeat Golden State’s Klay Thompson, a former champion in the event.

Beal felt his work before the shootout might have played a role in his performance.

“I might have over-prepared myself,” Beal said. “I came in and put a little too much pressure on myself, but it was fun. I got a good experience. It’s definitely different when it’s showtime. I will say that. It’s totally different.”

[Jazz rookie Donovan Mitchell delights in a nostalgic NBA Slam Dunk Contest win]

A slow start doomed Beal. But by the time he reached the fourth rack, stacked with money balls counting for two points, he had found his rhythm. Beal knocked down four of five shots, but the sweet shooting stroke arrived too late.

In 2014, Beal came up just short in the final round and thought this time would be different. It was — but only as it related to his nerves.

“I feel like I was a little more nervous this time,” Beal said. “I feel like I was a lot stronger, clanking off the glass. Oh, man. It was just downhill from there. But it was fun. It was a great experience.”

At least Beal had a better showing than Oklahoma City’s Paul George, who finished with nine.

“Hey, I got in double digits, man,” Beal said.

Although Beal’s Saturday night did not go as planned, he still has the main event. On Sunday, Beal will make his first appearance as an all-star as a reserve selected by LeBron James.

Read more on the NBA:

Adam Silver talks playoff reseeding, one-and-dones and more at NBA All-Star Weekend

LeBron James won’t shut up and dribble: ‘I’ve defeated the odds, and I want every kid to know that’

Charles Barkley and ‘NBA on TNT’ crew rip Laura Ingraham and Fox News

‘I’m taking on all challenges’: John Wall talks rehab, relationship with Marcin Gortat

Joel Embiid is already an all-star starter. His next goal: Becoming the NBA’s best player.As noted in our most recent fact check, false information is easily spread in times of chaos and confusion. Early reports are often incorrect or incomplete and information surrounding the horrific school shooting in Florida on Wednesday is no exception.

Facebook users marked a story on the shooting from the website Woke Sloth as potentially containing unsupported claims.

“The most recent school shooter was a Trump supporter who trained with White Nationalists” the post, which has been viewed tens of thousands of times, reported.

Today the disturbing news broke that [Nikolas] Cruz had trained with an armed white supremacist group, the Republic of Florida (ROF).



According to reports, “Cruz had participated in at least one training exercise near Tallahassee area, carpooling with other ROF members from south Florida.”

The article from Woke Sloth cited a Daily Beast piece that, in turn, relied on a report from the Anti-Defamation League. The ADL reported that “a spokesperson for the white supremacist group Republic of Florida (ROF) claimed . . . that Nikolas Cruz, the man charged with the previous day’s deadly shooting spree at a Parkland, Florida, high school, was associated with his group.”

Both articles from the Daily Beast and the ADL, however, include important updates to the story that Woke Sloth’s report does not.

On Thursday afternoon, Broward County Sheriff Scott Israel said claims that Cruz was associated with ROF are “not confirmed at this time” and that the police were still investigating potential connections.

Lt. Grady Jordan told reporters that his office (Leon County Sheriff’s Office in Tallahassee) has arrested the spokesperson for ROF, Jordan Jereb, “at least four times” according to the Associated Press, and that the group had no known connection to Cruz.

“His office has ‘very solid’ information on the group and ‘there’s no known ties that we have that we can connect’ 19-year-old Nikolas Cruz with the group,” the AP reported.

On Thursday afternoon, Jereb himsel—the spokesman for the white supremacist group—wrote online that he may have been mistaken in linking Cruz with his organization (the ADL noted this change of testimony in its update to the original report).

Additionally, the Southern Poverty Law Center, a left-wing organization, noted Thursday that Jereb was an attention seeker that other White Nationalists say “never misses a photo op” and is “a nut job who should be avoided.” In 2014, Jereb “wrote [the SPLC] to complain that [they] had not already listed ROF as a hate group,” the article says. “It may seem odd that Jereb would bring attention to his group by claiming a connection to Cruz, but Jereb has always been somewhat of a publicity seeker.”

Articles claiming that Cruz is demonstrably connected to the ROF may be missing key information that casts doubt on those alleged ties. The evidence that Cruz was a “Trump supporter” comes from reports by students that Cruz wore a “Make America Great Again” hat around the school and that he posed with the hat in a picture on Instagram.

As with most reporting after tragic and chaotic events, more information is required to back up or refute certain assertions.

If you have questions about this fact check, or would like to submit a request for another fact check, email Holmes Lybrand at hlybrand@weeklystandard.com or the Weekly Standard at factcheck@weeklystandard.com. For details on TWS Fact Check, see our explainer here.CLAIM

"The Simpsons" predicted that there would be a mass shooting at a screening of the movie "Black Panther."

FALSE

RATING

FALSE

ORIGIN

Popular animated television show ‘The Simpsons’ has gained a reputation for “predicting” the future over the years. Although we’d probably classify these predictions as coincidences (and have repeatedly noted that many of these predictions were actually hoaxes or misrepresented in some way), some internet users have come to see the show as some sort of window into the future.

So when rumors started circulating that the long-running show had predicted a mass shooting at a screening of the movie “Black Panther,” they were often accompanied by messages warning moviegoers to be careful or to even bring weapons to the theater:

This is not a genuine screenshot from The Simpsons.

For one, the geography in this still simply makes no logical sense. The bottom portion of the image features Ned Flanders looking down at a park. The image of the movie theater was shoehorned into this image, cutting off a bush and a field, in a way that simply isn’t plausible, even for the cartoon town of Springfield.

The image of Ned Flanders holding a sniper rifle did truly come from an episode of The Simpsons. However, Homer Simpson’s neighbor was not targeting moviegoers outside a screening of the movie Black Panther. This clip comes from the episode “Homer Loves Flanders,” which aired during the show’s 5th season in 1994, and featured Flanders fantasizing about killing Homer during a dream sequence:

This clip appears to be referencing the movie The Deadly Tower which was based off a real-world shooting that took place in 1966 at the University of Texas:

1966 University of Texas Shooting: When Flanders, during a dream sequence, begins to shoot citizens at random from the vantage point of a clock tower, he is mirroring the 1966 actions of real life mass shooter Charles Whitman. The Deadly Tower: It was also based on the events of the film The Deadly Tower, which was itself based on the event listed above.

The movie theater portion of the viral image did not originate in The Simpsons. This is merely a piece of clipart that was cropped, distorted, and graffitied with the words “Black Panther”:

Black Panther earned rave reviews before its premiere on 16 February 2018 and was expected to set a few box office records. Some racist internet users seemed perturbed over the movie’s projected success, however, in large part due to the nearly all black cast.

As moviegoers lined up for tickets for the film, internet trolls also started posting violent pictures (from unrelated events) along with fictional stories about how they had been mugged or beaten up at one of the screenings. They urged moviegoers to stay away from the theater or, at the very least, to bring weapons so that they could defend themselves.

Not only is this image purportedly showing Ned Flanders opening fire outside of a screening for Black Panther fake, it is also dangerous, stirring unfounded fears and calling for taking weapons to a movie theater.

We’ve reported this image to the FBI.In the wake of the tragic school shooting yesterday in Parkland, Florida fake photos began to surface, spreading misinformation and false accusations surrounding the event.

The anonymous Twitter account “MAGA Pill” shared a picture of what it claimed was an article from Buzzfeed titled, “Why We Need To Take Away White People’s Guns Now More Than Ever” by a “Richie Horowitz.” (The tweet has since been deleted. You can see a screenshot of it here.)

The photo is a fake. The picture of “Richie Horowitz” in the photo is actually BuzzFeed reporter Salvador Hernandez, who tweeted out the fake photo and noted that he was not “Horowitz.”

That’s my picture. That’s a fake story. And my name is not Richie Horowitz.



K, bye pic.twitter.com/5II9TuaSav— Salvador Hernandez (@SalHernandez) February 15, 2018

The actual story on Buzzfeed from which the fake is derived is titled “At Least 17 People Are Dead In A Florida School Shooting,” is by Hernandez, and makes no reference whatsoever to taking white people’s guns away. The headline and the author’s name were changed on the fake image posted by MAGA Pill, while the time of publishing, the subhead, and the picture of Hernandez were all in the original. Importantly, the MAGA Pill tweet included no link to the Buzzfeed story—only the faked image.

Buzzfeed reported that Lucian Wintrich, the White House correspondent for the site Gateway Pundit, shared the fake screenshot on Twitter. Wintrich then deleted his tweet when it was pointed out that the purported article was a forgery.

Miami Herald reporter Alex Harris was also the target of online image forgery. A tweet of hers was altered to make it look as though she had asked students if the shooter was white.

This is going to sting for a long time, Alex Harris. pic.twitter.com/7r5W0BgWTx— Ignignokt (@FTBLFN1) February 15, 2018

Harris never asked about the racial identity of the shooter. Here’s her actual, undoctored tweet:

Hi Mads, I'm so sorry to hear that you and your friends went through such a trauma. It's good to hear you guys are safe. I know you're overwhelmed right now, but if you're comfortable with it I'd like to ask you questions for the @MiamiHerald. Follow back if it's OK to DM— Alex Harris (@harrisalexc) February 14, 2018

Twitter users also shared a fake image claiming that Harris asked to get pictures and video of the event, including of “the dead bodies.” This forged photo looks to have originally been tweeted by @sadness_enjoyer.

Here’s what Harris actually tweeted:

Hi Alan, I'm heartbroken to hear about your friend. I hope your friend is OK. I know you're probably overwhelmed right now, but if you'd be comfortable talking to me about it for the @MiamiHerald , you can follow back to DM— Alex Harris (@harrisalexc) February 14, 2018

The fake pictures were shared multiple times on Twitter and generated a great deal of misinformed outrage toward Harris.

False information is easiest to spread in times of tragedy, chaos, and confusion. Don’t fall for it.

If you have questions about this fact check, or would like to submit a request for another fact check, email Holmes Lybrand at hlybrand@weeklystandard.com or the Weekly Standard at factcheck@weeklystandard.com. For details on TWS Fact Check, see our explainer here.